Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Page 1 


CORRESPONDENCE 
OF 
NAPOLEON FIRST. 
YEAR 1811. 


18245. - TO M. MARET, DUC DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 12, 1811. 


Monsieur le Duke de Bassano, it appears that Russian couriers passed to Meiz yesterday; we will 
have news today. I wish you to prepare for General Lauriston a dispatch which you will submit to me, 
and in which you will inform him of my arrival at Paris, the continuation of my pacific dispositions, and 
my desire to see the conclusion, this winter, of our differences with Russia. You will tell him that a 
division of cuirassiers has gone to Erfurt; that the uncertainty of all that was done in Prussia seemed to 
necessitate the increase of our forces in cavalry; that we know nothing of the manner of acting of this 
power; you will tell him what has happened with regard to armament, disarmament, the announcement 
that it was disarming and the continuation of armaments, so that I do not know what that means; that it 
must make it clear how the question is embarrassed, how it might lead to it, and how much it is 
necessary to appoint commissioners on both sides to tranquillize on all points and put an end to this state 
of affairs. 

You will be careful to make known that all this must be said without affectation and of course. 

Count Lauriston may even slightly insinuate that it is very unfortunate that Prussia interferes in 
arming; that it is in the interest of this power that it does not interfere with the question and does not 
allow itself for movements which may immediately lead to others. 

The same courier will carry a letter to M. de Saint-Marsan on the movements of Prussia and the 
necessity where it has put us’ 





Page 2 


to operate cavalry. He will again press Prussia to remain calm. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18246. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 8, 1811. 


Order the Prefect of La Roer to go to Wesel and terminate the affairs of that city: 1 to settle in 
receipts and to spend the budget for 1811; 2™ submit without delay the budget of 1812, so that it be 
submitted to my signature before the 1st of December; 3™ to create income, and therefore to establish a 
French-style grant for 1812. 

For the budget, the first question that comes up is debt. The debt has not been recognized; my 
intention is to regulate it as in Belgium; to constitute it in its entirety would absorb too much revenue; 
but a draft decree will be presented to me to form part of it on the principle of what has been done for 
Antwerp. 

The prefect will present a plan to set up a sub-prefecture, a court of first instance, at Wesel, and 
to form a district in the departments of Lippe and Roer, so that there are at least 50,000 souls. We will 
not take anything in the Grand Duchy of Berg. There is, I believe, a tribunal at Reuss; from then on, it 
will simply be to transfer it to Wesel. The decree will also designate the dwelling where the court and 
the sub - prefecture will be established. 

We will take care to repair the pavement perfectly; this is necessary for military 
communications. The prefect will also establish a lighting system such that the city is perfectly lit. The 
houses to be slaughtered will be evaluated, and the decree will order the demolition of the houses near 
the great church, which obstruct the communications from the Miinster gate to that of the Rhine. The 
prefect, the mayor and the commander of the engineering will meet, and the prefect will present a plan 
of alignment of the city, so as to destroy all the existing excavations, to regulate the traffic and to create 
a new place between the door of ....... (1) (and the current government house.) There could be a large 
square fort, one side of which would support the door, and one side of which would be used to build a 
hotel for the governor. hostel, a theater and 





1) The name 1s left blank on the minute.” 





Page 3 


the other necessary dwellings in a city of great garrison and which will be a considerable center of 
passage. 

The prefect will also present me a project to make known the place where one could establish a 
civil hospital, intended to contain ordinarily 100 beds and able to contain 300; what is needed in a war 
place. 

This commission will also present a project, with the estimate of the appropriate indemnities, to 
bring down all the houses which hinder the defense of the city; some were built on the very ground of 
the fortifications. 

The prefect will also present a draft decree and the measures to be taken to establish a French 
secondary school at Wesel and primary schools where French is shown, and finally to establish a 
bourgeois artillery company like the one in exists in Lille, and a fire department. 

The prefect will remain at Wesel until all these projects and estimates are perfectly written. 

According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18247. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


I see with pleasure, by your letter of the 9th, that the two battalions of the 1st and 2nd regiments 
of Banat are in good condition. Have them rest in Dijon two or three days, and order them to be directed 
to Paris, where I wish to see them. You will have them stay in a barracks two leagues from Paris, where 
you will pass the review, and when you have ascertained their correct condition, I will see them on the 
parade. 

The demand for French officers is right. You have to give them German speaking. 

As for the other regiment at Trieste, I do not know whether it would be proper to withdraw so 
many Croats; I do not think I asked. I would take them with pleasure, since that would make Germany a 
new brigade, but I would like to know if it is political. Give me a report on that. 

It is good that you write to these two regiments, before they arrive at Dijon, that their destination 
is for Paris, because I want to see them. This could be a good effect and may prevent some desertions. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.° 





Page 4 


18248. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 12, 1811. 


I answer your letter from the 6 on the armament of cuirassiers and lancers; it is an extremely 
important question. 

It is recognized that the armored cavalry can hardly use its carbine; but it is also very absurd that 
3 or 4,000 men of such good people are surprised in their quartering or arrested in their march by two 
companies of voltigeurs. It is therefore essential to arm them. The regiments of cuirassiers of the old 
regime had carabiners, which they wore, not like light cavalry, slung over their shoulders, but which 
they wore to use as rifles. 

I want you to form a council of cavalry officers and determine something about this object. I can 
not get used to seeing 3,000 elite men who, in an insurrection or surprise of light troops, would be 
kidnapped by a partisan, or in a march stopped by some bad skirmishers behind a brook or a house: this 
is absurd. My intention is that every man has a rifle; that it is a very short carabiner, worn in the most 
suitable manner to the cuirassiers, I do not care. I have already given the big cavalry carabiners. At 
peace they sent them away; in the last campaign they did not have one. 

Present me a project on this, so that these 3,000 men do not need infantry to keep in their 
cantonments, and, dismounting, can emerge when there is an infantry force a great disproportion with 
them. The war is composed of unforeseen events; it is not to have any idea of it that supposing that 
15,000 men of heavy cavalry can always be held in order to be covered. 

As for lancers, see if it is possible to give them a rifle with their spear; if it is not possible, it 
would be necessary to have at least one-third of the company armed with rifles, that is to say, all the first 
rank and half of the second rank, all the marshals of the houses and the third of the company (about 40 
men, supposing them complete), armed with carbines. The Cossacks have the spear, but they have rifles 
and even large guns with which they fire very far." 


Page 5 


You will also bring this into the object of the work of the commission of general officers. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18249. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


I see in your letter of the 6th of November, that the three Swiss regiments which are in France 
will be able to offer me only six battalions, and the Ist, which arrives at Placentia, only two. It would be 
only eight battalions instead of twelve. But I expect a recruitment of 3,000 men during the winter; This 
will allow each regiment to supply one more battalion. To have these 3,000 men, it is urgent to attend 
diligently. See the Duke of Bassano and M. Maillardoz. Switzerland costs me immense money and does 
me no service; until this hour I am very duped, since I have a cohort of officers without soldiers. It is 
necessary that the cantons undertake to recruit; 2" reduce battalions from nine to six companies, which 
will reduce officers by one-third. I will then have four regiments, each regiment of four battalions, each 
battalion of six companies, each company of 140 men, and 3,200 men per regiment or 12,000 men. To 
recruit these 12,000 men, it is necessary that the cantons undertake to keep them in full. I approve, 
however, that they are not obliged to furnish more than 3,000 men a year. 

3,000 men in eight years equal 24,000 men; in taking away the dead, the deserters, etc., it is to be 
hoped that this will be maintained at 12,000 men. 

It would be necessary, however, that in the case of a war with Russia or Austria, a war which 
interests the Swiss, since in case of unsuccessful they would be compromised, they supply 4,000 men 
instead of 3,000. Here are the basics on which to work without delay. 

However, they must provide 16,000 men; there will therefore be for them economy. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.” 





Page 6 


18250. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


During my stay in Givet, a detachment of British prisoners worked to restore a flying bridge. 
Among these I noticed the zeal and activity of eight or ten of those especially who threw themselves into 
a batelet to help maneuver the bridge. Order that the state of the ten men who are most distinguished in 
this circumstance be trained; that the men should be dressed to nine, and that each one should be given 
five napoleons with an order of the road to Morlaix, where they will be handed over to the Transport 
Office, making known the reason for their deliverance. You will inform the Minister of the Navy, whom 
this correspondence looks upon. It is necessary that there be no injustice, and that the men who have 
behaved best be chosen preferably. There is an English minister there who has asked for permission to 
spend three months in England; give it to him. He could be responsible for driving others. Finally, I send 
you a petition which has been handed to me in the same circumstances by an Englishwoman; give me a 
report on what she is asking for. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18251. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS, 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


The captain of the artillery company of the 3rd regiment on horseback, which is at Bonn, is 
missing; the lieutenant is a young madman, having three or four years of service: it is very important to 
send a good captain to this company. I even wish it to be sent to an infantry division in Germany, since 
it is composed of conscripts, and to be replaced by another company of the 2nd regiment of mounted 
artillery. By this means, the division of cuirassiers would be served by the companies of the same 
regiment. 

I would like the same thing for all the divisions of cuirassiers. Instead of two companies from 
two different regiments, each would have two companies of the same regiment. 

Likewise for the battalions of the train, there are at Cologne two companies of the same battalion 
of the train which serve in two different divisions; there are similarly in Bonn two other companies of 
the same 





Page 7 


battalion divided between two divisions; it would be much more convenient to unite them. It is 
necessary that the two companies of the train which appear necessary for the service of the same 
division of cuirassiers are of the same battalion. 

An important observation, too, is to give the command of the light artillery of cuirassiers to men 
who have made previous campaigns with the divisions of cuirassiers. I saw in Bonn a chef who has not 
yet done this service and who is going to do his apprenticeship. 

These divisions of cuirassiers serve differently. It is therefore necessary to have men who have 
experienced the campaigns of Austria, Iena or Friedland. 

These mounted artillery companies have no workmen, so that the twenty-four pieces of cannon I 
saw in Cologne and Bonn did not have a single workman. Why do horse-drawn artillery companies have 
no workers? 

Do not attach to the service of the cuirassiers any artillery company which has been ruined in 
Spain, and which has been recruited with the conscription of this year; but put on horse-drawn artillery 
companies that have not suffered and rested since 1809. 

It is necessary to appoint a general of artillery brigade to take the command of the artillery of the 
cavalry of reserve. He will have forty-eight pieces under his orders, will review it, put everything in 
order, and may hold himself at Wesel. 

It would also be necessary to have a brigadier general who had served the cavalry, either as 
colonel or general, in past campaigns. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18252. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


I answer your letter of the 9th on the artillery crews of the observation corps of the Elbe. 

I do not know why the 7th Division is carried to twenty-eight pieces of cannon; it seems to me 
that he must only have fourteen, like the others. This division is also at Danzig. 

Have state n°1 redone. 

The artillery of the 1st, 5th and 6th divisions will be placed in the 32nd military division, as well 
as sixteen pieces of the reserve division. Their’ 





Page 8 


park must be organized so that they have their dual supply. 

The 7th division will be placed at Danzig; To this end, we will take all the equipment, staff and 
teams on what exists today in Danzig. 

The artillery of the 8th and the 9th Division, as well as the two batteries of the reserve, will meet 
at Wesel: to know, their supply and a half by division, and the remainder forming a portion of the part of 
the reserve park which will remain at Wesel. 

Lastly, the artillery of the four cavalry reserve divisions, forming a state apart, having the 
artillery of two divisions at Wesel, and that of a division at Hanover, with a supply of one and a half; 
one to Erfurt with a supply and a half, and the other half-supply with half-supply of the divisions which 
are on the Rhine, to Wesel, where they will form the reserve. 

Depending on your condition, it takes 7,000 horsepower to do this service. I think that the four 
battalions which are in Germany should be completed in men and horses, and destined for the service of 
the nine infantry divisions and the four batteries of the reserve and the park, and employ another 
battalion of those who are in France, which one would also complete, for the service of the four 
divisions of the cavalry reserve. By this means the big park would be divided into two fractions: one in 
Minden and one in Wesel. The whole organization of the cuirassiers would be attached to an artillery 
general and a director of the cavalry reserve park, who would reside at Wesel and report to the director 
general of the park. It would then remain to send workers to Wesel to mount a strong repair workshop. It 
would also take all the churches of Wesel, except for one for the Catholics and one for the Protestants, to 
be able to deposit all this material and shelter it during the bad season, without however unloading it: the 
horses will be in Wesel and in the surroundings; so that, twenty-four hours after the reception of your 
order, the whole column may set out to march on the campaign. 

It seems to me that there is a need for a colonel at Minden, an artillery general and a director of 
the park at Wesel. The equipment becoming very considerable, it would be necessary to have a general 
of division to command the artillery, and three brigadier generals, each of them charged with the 
command and supervision of the artillery of three divisions, and who would be employed according to 
the circumstances and modifications that events would necessitate. As for companies 


Page 9 


in the artillery, it is necessary to seek the companies of the regiments on foot or on horseback, which are 
already in Germany, since there is so great an advantage in keeping the regiments together as much as 
possible. 

It is necessary that this does not affect the organization of the corps of Italy or that of the corps of 
observation of the Rhine, so that these corps can organize an artillery as it was set on paper, without the 
need for new calculations; for the observation corps of the Elbe must be independent of the organization 
of the other two corps. 

Independently of the reserve of the Guard, you will make me a state of recapitulation which 
makes known the state of all the artillery: 1st, that of the corps of the Elbe, as has been said above, 2nd 
of the reserve of the cavalry, 3rd that of Italy, and 4th that of the Rhine, as they were previously 
regulated. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18253. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 12, 1811. 


The 127th, 128th and 129th regiments give serious concern; all the tests that have been made by 
placing them on the islands have not succeeded. This justifies the rumors that had reached me for several 
months by England about these regiments. It is time to take a party. We must first separate them. Order 
the Prince d'Eckmiihl, by the evening dispatch, to send out the one of the three regiments, which is the 
worst, and direct him to Maestricht. Order a good brigadier general, speaking German, to take command 
of this regiment and to pass a severe inspection. The two other regiments will be placed under orders, 
one of General Latour, the other of a brigadier-general, speaking German, whom the Prince of Eckmuhl 
will designate. The Prince of Eckmiihl, where he will review it himself, or pass a rigorous review by his 
staff officers. He will direct by detachments of 100 men, on the regiments of the Tour d'Auvergne and 
Isembourg, the Prussians, Mecklenburgers, Russians and Danes who are in these regiments. It will send 
to the colonial pioneers the bad subjects that there would be. Finally he will proceed to the cleaning of 
the cadres in the following way: he will see the colonels, majors, chiefs of battalion and adjutants- 
majors, will make sure that they are French speaking German, having made the war with us and having 
the qualities” 





Page 10 


required. He will be authorized to send to Maestricht or Wesel, where they will be at your disposal, the 
officers who do not possess the necessary qualifications, with notes, so that you may offer me 
employment for them; the captains, lieutenants and second lieutenants who leave the Austrian service; 
he will also send notes on them. Those who will be suspected will also be sent back to Wesel. As for 
those coming out of the old service, from the cities of Bremen, Hamburg, Oldenburg, he will distinguish 
those who are native to the cities, who are domiciled there, and of their parents, of those who are 
foreigners, and who have been admitted to service of these cities. 

Foreigners will be sent to Wesel, with notes, so that you can propose to give them employment 
or to place them in foreign regiments. Those who are of the country, the prince of Eckmiihl will make 
two classes: some, which we will try to keep in the regiments until further order, and the others, that we 
can send to Italy and Spain in the corps. He will have the vacant officers and non-commissioned officers 
replaced, so as to complete only three battalions in each regiment. The result of this operation will be 
that there will be in these regiments other superior officers only French officers, and other captains, 
lieutenants and sub-lieutenants than Frenchmen or officers who have made war with us, or officers 
leaving the Austrian service, and provisionally officers of the country, good subjects, domiciled and 
known. The same operation will be done for non-commissioned officers. No foreign NCO will be 
suffered in these regiments; only NCOs born in the 32nd Military Division, but domiciled and known, 
will be kept there; still this number will be noted, in order to insensibly make them pass elsewhere. 
Finally the same operation will be done for the soldiers. All that will be Prussian, Danish, Swedish, 
Mecklenburger, Russian, will be directed, by detachments of 100 men, to the regiments of Strasburg and 
Tour d'Auvergne, so that only men born in the 32nd military division will remain in the regiment; and 
those who would be considered bad subjects, either foreigners or the natives of the country, will be 
governed by detachments of 25 men from the settlements of colonial pioneers. You will authorize Prince 
Eckmiithl to replace the officers and non-commissioned officers by men drawn from his army corps, but 
speaking German; he will send you the report, and you will present to me draft decrees to be signed. 
You will give the same instructions for the regiment when it reaches Maestricht. We will see, when the 
regiments are thus purified, if they present a more satisfactory aspect. ' 





10 


Page 11 


Tell the Prince of Eckmiihl that it would be important for him to be able to see these regiments himself, 
at least that he should have this operation done by a man of a more sure and finer tact than General 
Latour. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18254. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNTY OF CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


In the visit I made to different corps of the army, I found that the troops were better dressed than 
in the revolution, where the supplies were made by the suppliers of the time; but I was far from satisfied, 
considering the immense sums which they cost me and the regularity which is carried in the 
administration in the present times. It is impossible to provide anything to the troops who are good; 
because how can they want to fight against the interest of suppliers? In general, knits are bad, shakos are 
of poor quality, or they are often of good quality, but poorly made. It is the same of the gibbets. No 
reproach can be done to the corps, because they answer all that the administration of the war sent them 
to them ". As for the sheets, most of the one I saw is much worse than the one I saw at the regiments that 
bought them themselves. 

The light infantry regiments, which used to buy sheets, find, in general, that the sheets [woolen 
fabric] they bought were much better than the ones they are sent. 

I therefore wish to know in what manner dress will be made in 1812. It is my intention that the 
administration of war supplies nothing, at most cloth; and again I think that this is a question: for it is the 
fact that the regiments of light infantry, during the time they have dressed, have been better than they are 
today. A major who is pressed by a large number of conscripts whom he has to clothe receives all that is 
sent to him, although of bad quality. There are also people who do not want to do business and establish 
a litigation. It is therefore necessary that effective measures are taken to ensure that the sheet that will be 
provided is provided good, especially as it is not reasonable to send sheets to the bottom of Illyria so 
they come back then. It is late for everything, is detrimental to my service and ruins the suppliers. We 
must give the regiments the latitude not to receive the sheet that would be bad, but first and foremost!’ 


alls 


Page 12 


take steps to ensure that the sheets we send are of good quality. The present offices of clothing are 
organized only for accounting; they do nothing to ensure the accuracy of shipments, what is in store and 
the kindness of supplies; so that, instead of welcoming and encouraging the complaints of corps, they 
are badly received in general. 

In the Grand Duchy of Berg, I give all the money to the corps; the masses are a little less strong 
than in France; I have not seen troops so well dressed and in such good condition; that can not make any 
comparison with ours. 

In your rides, I found a lot of bad horses. Market conditions are generally to be redone. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18255. - TO COUNT LACEPEDE, 
GRAND CHANCELLOR OF THE LEGION OF HONOR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


I am assured that Chief of Battalion Everts, of the 4th of line, has been appointed officer of the 
Legion of Honor not yet legionnaire. You had to verify the fact, and if it was true, send me back my 
decree. You are not excusable. 

You know that I always have the principle of never being an officer in the Legion of Honor if 
one is not already legionary, as well as for all ranks. 

When an error occurs, it is up to you to represent the decree. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18256. - TO COUNT LACEPEDE, 
GREAT CHANCELLOR OF THE LEGION OF HONOR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 


Count Lacpede, wishing to give a proof of my satisfaction to Prince Kolowski, Minister of the 
Emperor of Russia in Sardinia, I have granted him the Golden Eagle (1). Send him this decoration to 
Cagliari, where he is, by the channel of the commanding general in Corsica. You can warn Prince 
Kurakin by a 





1) The original text bore: The Eagle of the Legion of Honor, The Emperor has, with his hand, erased the last words, 
and replaced them with the note of gold."” 


12 


Page 13 


the Emperor of Russia allowed Prince Kolowski to accept the decoration. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Honore Bonhomme. 


18257.-VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 14, 1811. 


There is a decree for La Spezia. However, construction continued to take place in Genoa. What 
had led me to place the establishments at La Spezia was less the beauty of the harbor than the bad 
establishment of Genoa. The constructions took place outside the fortifications, in an isolated place, 
which was not reasonable; but since you have made known to me that we can build in the dock, I think 
that we must stick to Genoa, for all sorts of reasons, first because it is the center of a large population, 
and that offers all ease. Give me a report on that; because, if you can build in the dock, you will have a 
superb arsenal. I would not be far from prolonging the dikes and spending 2 millions for that; which, 
moreover, has the political advantage of being very agreeable to this great population. That supposed, it 
would be necessary that the marine kept the establishment of the quarantine station of Spezia. This year, 
I made work for the fortifications, since in maneuvering in the Mediterranean there is no doubt that this 
gulf will be necessary to us, and that it will be useful even to repair our ships. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18258. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 14, 1811. 


The Gulf of Villefranche can be useful to our squadrons, as well as the Gulf Juan. Draw on a 
map the batteries that exist, as well as the armament and their current state. It is to be expected that our 
ships of Toulon, continuing to leave, will be obliged to seek their refuge in the harbor of Marseilles. Let 
me know where they are going and the current situation of the batteries, so that I can determine what 
needs to be done. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


als 


Page 14. 


18239. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Saint-Cloud, November 14, 1811. 


Cousin, it would be proper for you to submit to me a plan for a movement, on the following 
bases, to be executed in the event of Prussia being in bad faith. Prince Poniatowski, with the Army of 
the Grand Duchy and the 7th Division, would meet in a combined movement, in a few days, and before 
the news reached Berlin, to intercept the road from Berlin to Graudenz and Dirschau; so that all the 
existing Prussian soldiers would be disarmed and taken prisoner, the convoys taken, Graudenz first 
blocked, Marienburg occupied and immediately entrenched, and the entrenchments the enemy made on 
the from Pillau, in the isthmus which communicates with Danzig, surprised, at the time that all the 
Saxons would march by Glogau, and you by Stettin and Magdeburg on Berlin and on Kolberg. This 
project aims, if Prussia continues to be in bad faith, to take the initiative; it must be well calculated to 
make it profitable. Mark me on a map the current position of the Army of the Grand Duchy, that of your 
divisions, the troops of Saxony and Westphalia, and let me know how you would hear these movements, 
and finally what are the forces Prussia would have to oppose Berlin and Kolberg. It will be necessary, 
when I have approved this plan, that you communicate it to Prince Poniatowski and General Rapp, so 
that they know him well, and that, informed of my intentions, they have an eye on the gatherings of the 
Prussians and know where it hits as soon as you give them the order. 

I do not need to tell you that this is all very hypothetical. Count Saint-Marsan is at present 
negotiating with Prussia; but I see so much bad faith and uncertainty in this cabinet, that I believe it will 
be impossible to prevent its ruin. I believe that on the Oder the Prussians have only one bridge; it will 
therefore be easy to seize and destroy it, and to envelop all their garrisons between the Oder and the 
Vistula before they perceive it. The forces of the Prussians are divided, I believe, between Saxony and 
Silesia, between the Elbe and the Vistula, between the Vistula and the Niemen. How many troops are 
there in each of these parts? how much can they bring together? For this operation I do not need to tell 
you that Modlin and Zamosc will be well supplied and armed; that part of the army of the Grand Duchy 
will be under observation on the side of Russia, and that all'* 


14 


Page 15 


your corps d'armee and the Saxons will be on the Vistula before the Russians, since you would be in 
Berlin that one would not know it yet in Petersburg. Share the situation in Marienburg. Have the 
fortifications I had been established destroyed, or could this post be promptly restored? If the 
entrenchments on the side of the .... (1) could not be removed with a hand, we must have a good number 
of howitzers and small mortars, to overwhelm them with shells and bombs and the to destroy in a few 
days, in order to close the passage of Pillau at once. Let me know how far the boundary of Danzig's 
territory is on this side. It might be convenient to have a good redoubt established at the edge of the 
Danzig territory. By this means we could mask the movement, and instead of leaving Danzig, we would 
leave the redoubt. Besides, since the Prussians work so much at Pillau, the occupation of a point on this 
side is very cautious. 

Do not write anything about it to General Rapp or Prince Poniatowski. Start by taking 
information before responding to me; it does not hurry. It is better to wait a fortnight for you to let me 
know the state of the chessboard. When I have your plan, I will ratify it, and then I will only allow you 
to communicate this possible project to Prince Poniatowski and General Rapp. 

NAPOLEON. 


P.S. The Russians have great successes over the Turks, who behaved like brute beasts. I see 
peace so far as to conclude, I am assured of Austria. 
From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmihl. 


18260. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG 
Saint-Cloud, November 14, 1811. 


Cousin, if the war takes place and Prussia is against us, the first thing to do is to send from 
Mugdeburg a siege crew to take Spaudau, and places from Stettin, Ktistriu and Glogau, a siege crew for 
Kolberg. It is therefore necessary that these two siege crews exist and be trained on the paper, so that it 
is certain to have in these places the parts, the carriages, the carriers, the carts, the platforms, the tools, 
the powders, 





1) Here an illegible word,'> 





HBS: 


Page 16 


artifices, etc., so that, twenty-four hours after the unmasked movement, the siege crew for Spandau 
could leave Magdeburg, and, six days after the unmasked movement, the Kolberg siege crew could 
leave Oder. You feel that this work must be done very secretly in the office of your artillery general. I 
think Magdeburg will be able to find the Spandau siege crew. I doubt whether we can train in the 
squares of Stettin, Kiistrin, and Glogau, that destined for Kolberg. We must see if this crew exists in 
Magdeburg regardless of the defense of the place. If the means of this place are insufficient, it will have 
to be brought from Hamburg and Wesel; but it must leave Wesel by means of artillery relays placed 
from Wesel to Magdeburg. In this way transportation would not cost anything; that would not give the 
country any trouble, and would soon reach Magdeburg. I think that all that is necessary for the defense 
of the squares of Stettin, Kiistrin and Glogau must be established. I believe that Magdeburg is 
sufficiently supplied; it is not the same for other places. The siege crews of Spandau and Kolberg can be 
included in the supply of these places, since, while these ammunition were consumed, new ones would 
be brought from France. I think the artillery personnel at the Stettin, Kiistrin and Glogau squares are not 
enough. Send to these places two companies of artillery, those attached to your parade; you will find 
them walking forward. Also send staff officers of artillery and engineering. The garrisons of Stettin and 
Kiislrin are, I believe, sufficient; that of Glogau is not. Propose me to send a new regiment, so that we 
do not worry. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original comm. by Madame the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18261. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 14, 1811. 


Isend you a letter from the Prince d'Eckmiihl, with a letter from Minister Cessac and various 
documents. It is proper that you order the Major of the Ist chasseurs to go to Paris, and that you appoint 
an inspector of magazines and two officers. accustomed to the details of the administration of the war, to 
follow the complaint, ’® 


16 


Page 17 


I attach the greatest consequence to it. The response of the clothing offices is not satisfactory. The 
suspicion hangs over the major; if he is guilty, he must be dismissed; if, on the contrary, this major is 
innocent, it is wrong that the agents of the clothing want to cover thus their dilapidations. 

This case must therefore be thoroughly studied, as well as all those which would arrive, either to 
bring the light in the operations of the clothing, or to have clear ideas on the honesty of the majors. 

A circular must be made to the various majors to make them responsible for the effects to be 
received by the regiments, and to inform them that they must receive no ill effects, so that they have 
nothing to complain whenever the regiments will be in a bad situation; that the supplies cost His Majesty 
a great deal, and that the payments are exactly made; it must be said that the effects are of good quality 
and very good service. The same goes for the horses of return. Put on the agenda, and show my 
dissatisfaction with the colonel of the 20" chasseurs that he has received horses that are to reform or 
evaluate half the purchase price. Make known that the colonels and officers who will receive the horses 
will be responsible for all the bad horses they receive. My troops are very expensive and partly badly 
dressed. All that is furnished to them is excellent in comparison with that which was furnished in the 
revolution, but not with regard to the order and regularity which have been introduced into the 
administration. 

According to your minute, Archives of the Empire. 


18262. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 15, 1811. 


Count Montalivet, I will hold a council of the interior during each week of November, 
December, January, and February; which will make fourteen tips. It will begin by dealing with objects 
relating to trade and manufactures. We will then deal with the various branches of your ministry 
successively. Three councils may be devoted to the affairs of bridges and roads and public works; three 
councils, placed fifteen days apart, to the budgets of the city of Paris and towns with more than a million 
of revenue, and to the accounts of the reserve companies; i 


aly) 


Page 18 


two councils, also placed at an interval of fifteen days, for the work of mineral waters, prisons, and 
begging houses; a council, to the debts of the departments and to the budgets of the variable and fixed 
centimes; finally, other councils will be used to treat objects relating to the changes in the prefectures 
and the town halls of the good cities, the affairs of the ruins, the bookshop, the public instruction, the 
sciences and arts and other objects of your department . I wish you to report on the distribution and order 
of the matters to be dealt with in these councils. The accounts of 1810 and 1811 will be examined, so 
that, if funds are insufficient, the necessary supplements may be granted for each article. After having 
considered the account of each branch of administration, the legislation will be considered, and suitable 
changes proposed to advance towards the perfection of each party. It is necessary that the meeting of the 
minutes of these councils be at the same time a financial account and a statement of the reasons for the 
changes and the improvements carried out, The results of all these reports are: 1* the real state of the 
expenses from 1810; 2™ the approximate state of the expenses of 1811; 3" the budget of 1812. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18263, - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 15, 1811. 


Count Decres, wishing to consider in the councils that I propose to hold this winter, every 
fortnight, the principal parts of the administration of your department, it is necessary to regulate the 
order of the matters which will have to be treated in each session, so that the main objects, the state of 
expenditure of your department, the final accounts of the year 1810 and previous years, the approximate 
account of 1811 and the budget of 1812, the pay, the training of the crews, Next year's armaments, new 
school institutions, hammering and logging, supplies of all kinds and hydraulic works, are the subject of 
seven councils. Please submit a project to settle what will be done in each council. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres.'® 





18 


Page 19 


18264. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 16, 1811. 


Count Decres, I send you notes on the flotilla of Boulogne, which will make you perfectly know 
in what spirit I consider it. The flotilla of Boulogne will be one of the most powerful means of 
influencing England; and whenever our squadrons begin to stir and the fleet is doubled or tripled, the 
fishermen and sailors of the coast will be required to embark on the flotilla of artillery and materiel. 
England will expect a combination which will bring squadrons to Boulogne, and from then on she will 
be obliged to keep a large part of her ships in the Thames and the Dunes, and a body of troops large 
enough to cover London and its yards. I therefore think that four or five hundred vessels of the flotilla 
will always be necessary to have at Boulogne, in order to be able to transport forty thousand men and 
several thousand horses on the other bank; that artillery and equipment can be reduced at will, in order 
to relieve the buildings and to give more space for transport; lastly, that we can use indifferently all the 
buildings we have; that the expense will consist in the maintenance of the 500 buildings. Let me know 
the situation of the flotilla as I ordered it, which has since been subtracted, what remains in material and 
personnel, in order to definitively settle the organization of all that is necessary for the flotilla. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18265. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINSTRE OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 18, 1811. 


You will find letters from the King of Naples; you will answer it. As soon as we know the 
quantity of mortars which is necessary for it, we will keep it at Toulon; it will be necessary for him to 
send buildings to look for them. He must make known the distance from which these mortars must be 
fired, so that he may be sent to them who have the requisite qualities. Having ordered the establishment 
of a camp at Scilla, my intention was that this camp should be permanent like those of Boulogne, of the 
Texel; it was the way to have well disciplined troops, and to be constantly ready for the expedition of” 





19 


Page 20 


Sicily without the enemy being able to prejudge the determined period; but the King having judged it 
expedient, although commanding my army, to raise the camp and return to Naples, he thereby made my 
projects miss, and made the position of the English in Sicily beautiful, bad that it would become. It is of 
the first importance to have a stronghold at the end of the boot, where a garrison of 2 or 3,000 men can 
hold six weeks open trench and give time to come to their rescue. In this place, supplies of countryside, 
siege and strong batteries to intercept the strait, will have to exist. This place was to be built for three 
years; but at Naples nothing has been done, because the kingdom is governed without plan. 
Consequently, what is of the first necessity is to have a strong point on the continent, towards Sicily, 
which ensures the communications of the army in Sicily; it's the first thing to do. I want to have a map 
of the place where we work, and to know when it can be finished. As for an expedition to Sicily, it 
should not be considered as an expedition of a month or two; it must be considered a permanent war and 
must be firmly established. Meanwhile, a camp of 10 or 12,000 men must be placed near Sicily; it will 
also serve to accelerate the work of the fortress. A flotilla of war must be reunited. When these 
preliminary operations are done, the movement of the squadrons of Toulon, Texel, and the Scheldt, with 
troops that I send from France, will do the rest, But the Sicilian expedition to the English line, which is 
the mistress of the sea can be combined and followed to be put to an end only with secrecy and activity; 
the role to be played by the King of Naples is to gather 10 or 12,000 men and a flotilla on the side of the 
strait, and to establish a place which can support two months of open trench, with formidable batteries at 
the point opposite the strait. 

If English frigates have approached the coast, it is because the batteries are badly armed or badly 
arranged; they must be armed with cannon of a higher caliber. 

Indeed, it seems that a sharp dissension takes place in Sicily. The action taken by the King, to 
have closed the camp of Sicily without my order, having disturbed my dispositions and missed the 
opportunity to take advantage of them, steps must be taken to remedy them as soon as possible, starting 
an operation plan that can have these results. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.”” 


20 


Page 21 


18266. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Saint Cloud. November 18, 1811. 


My son, brigandage is increasing in the neighborhood of Rome. 

Form as many moving columns as necessary, composed of Italians and French, with detachments 
of cavalry; put at the head of these columns active and intelligent officers, and have them march on the 
Roman States; they will combine with that formed by General Miollis to put an end to this brigandage. 
Take care of this with activity. The Grand Duchess will also send from Tuscany some moving columns. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. the Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18267. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 19, 1811. 


Cousin, send an officer to Marshal Suchet at once; let him know the movement of General 
Reille, who must march in Aragon to support him. Let him know that the same day that he thought Mina 
had gathered at Empecinado to rescue Blake, this Mina was on the side of Mondragon, who was eagerly 
pursued by General Bourke. Tell him that we have news of Gibraltar on the 25th of October; that the 
troops of the army of the South have removed the camp of Saint-Roch and Algeciras; that Ballesteros is 
surrounded under Gibraltar; that General Decaen has left to rescue Barcelona and will do all he can; that 
the King is calling, from November 1, he had occupy Cuenca in great force to support him, and that the 
Duke of Ragusa was ordered to send on this point a division. Announce that the English have 18,000 
patients in Portugal and are unable to undertake anything; that the Duke of Dalmatia has orders to send a 
column to Murcia to make a diversion; so that we must vigorously attack Valencia and seize it. 

Return to the Duke of Ragusa his aide-de-camp; let him know that the big deal of the moment is 
the taking of Valencia. Announce to him the advantages which Marshal Suchet has just won. Send him 
the Moniteur (for a month), he will see that the English have 18,000 sick and seem determined to remain 
on the defensive. It is essential, if Valencia is not taken, that he make a detachment of 6,000 men who 
can reunite with what the Army of the Center will have available and march to the aid of Marshal 
Suchet. immediately” 





21 


Page 22 


Valencia taken, many troops will be available, it will be considerably strengthened; then will begin the 
great operations of his army. At that time, that is to say, towards the end of January, after the rainy 
season, he must go with the army of Portugal and part of that of the south, to Elvas, and flood the 
Aleutejo, the northern army, reinforced with a part of the army of reserve, will be on the Coa and 
Alfayates. But the important thing, at this moment, is the taking of Valencia; he must therefore 
immediately put a division into motion. 

Write to the King in this sense. I suppose he will have sent what he has available to communicate 
with Marshal Suchet and support him; tell him that, if Valencia is not taken, I order the Duke of Ragusa 
to send a division, which will join his troops, so as to form a good corps of 10 to 12,000 men to march to 
the marshal's assistance Suchet. Send the Moniteur a month to the King, Marshal Suchet, to Generals 
Reille, Caffarelli, and Dorsenne, 

Write to General Reille that I hope he has received the news of Marshal Suchet of the 6th; that it 
is necessary to support him by immediately sending Severoli's division, and by marching himself in 
Aragon with his division, to support the marshal. Tell him that General Decaen is marching on 
Barcelona. Order General Caflarelli to go with his division against Mina, to pursue him everywhere until 
his destruction, to take command of Navarre and to support General Reille in Aragon. General Dorsenne 
is strong enough; write to him that the big deal is to take Valencia. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18268. TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 19, 1812. 


Cousin, the last letters of General Monthion which you handed me are of the 29th of October; 
here are twenty days. It is surprising that he does not send his reports more often. I have nothing, at the 
date of twenty days, of Generals Caffarelli and Beille; this negligence is too strong; Generals Monthion, 
Thouvenal, Reille, Cuffarelli, and Dorsenne must report to you every day and your correspondence be 
better fed. Hand me” 





22 


Page 23 


the last states of situation of the North; that I know the number of patients who are in Biscay. Give me 
also the state of the orders which you gave for the battalions of march and those which you sent to the 
General Monthion for the movements of these battalions. 
NAPOLEON 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18269. - TO M. MARET DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 20, 1811 


The Duke of Bassano, communicate to the Danish Minister the news from England; tell him that 
English goods have increased by 50 per cent in Helgoland, and that they are paid in Holstein. Write to 
my minister in Copenhagen and to the Prince of Eckmiihl for action to be taken and measures taken to 
prevent this smuggling. You will reason with the Danish Minister; you will call him what I once did for 
Holstein, and you will make him understand that it would be ungrateful to let contraband again in this 
country, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18270. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


We ask 1“ Lyons why we do not take on the right bank of the Saone the materials to fill 
Perrache; it is said that a great deal of expense would be saved, and that it would serve for the road to 
Ardeche; 

2™ What are the means of removing the ruins on the quays of Pierre-Encise; 

3" When the begging depot is established a designates a site named Pierre-Bénite, on the Rhone, 
as very suitable for this establishment. 

Why do not the inhabitants of Lyons send their children to high schools, and why do they send 
them to Largentiere and Tournon? There are difficulties in these high schools that the grand master must 
raise. 

The begging deposit of Florence will be ready only ina year” 


23 


Page 24 


and can only receive 800 beggars. We complain that the buildings are badly made and that part has 
already collapsed. Two briefs were sent to the department about this: report it to me. The municipality of 
Florence, being rich, must provide for it. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18271.-TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, 
MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


I beg you to secretly take some information, and to see if you could not suggest to me some ideas 
to give the administration of the games a fixed rule. 

The administration of the Paris Games, it seems, employs a fund of bankers from 11 to 1200,000 
francs. Independently of 3 or 4 million which it pays in the police fund and expenses of any kind, that 
administration makes a profit which one estimates from 100 to 150 per cent, so that this house reread 2 
to 3 million the placing of a capital of 1,200,000 francs. It is calculated, I believe, that games make 
bankers 7 to 8 million gross. It seems to me extremely absurd to leave a house which has made a huge 
fortune an annual bonus of 1,800,000 francs. There was a time when the sum of 1,200,000 francs it takes 
every day could be an object. 

It would be necessary to learn the mechanism of this machine, and see if it could not be exploited 
by a company, either for the benefit of hospitals, or that of the supply of wheat reserves of the city from 
Paris. 

One named Davelouis was very much occupied with these matters; he is good at listening, 
without believing in all his assertions. He can indicate men versed in this part. This must be done with 
secrecy and some kind of skill, because the police are very much on the lookout, viewing the games as a 
farm that many of the minister's agents want to exploit for their benefit. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18272. - TO GENERAL SAVARY, DUKE OF ROVIGO, 
MINISTER OF GENERAL POLICE, PARIS 
St. Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


I missed you mainly by having someone sued for the sole reason that he had made complaints to 





24 


Page 25 


against you; which is all the more unfair since he taught me things that I did not know and that I should 
not ignore. Let him know that he has to go home and have nothing to fear. Taking from this moment this 
individual under my special protection, I mean that no action against him is taken without my special 
permission. I hope you will not fall back into such a failure. All French citizens have the right to claim 
from me against anyone; and none must be stopped, when it is by the order of the ministry, until it has 
been reported to me and I have given my approval. 

According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18273. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


Show the fortifications committee whether, by seizing all the islands which border the Morbihan 
harbor, and placing pieces of 36 at the angle of 40 degrees, and mortars at Villantroys, I will not 
succeed. to cross the mobiles in such a way that the enemy can not anchor there, or to anchor there 
without security, and to recover this harbor. The anchorage of the enemy in these places has many 
disadvantages, since it intercepts our cabotage of Brittany. The regiment of Belle-Ile would serve me 
wonderfully for this object. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18274. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


I am deeply satisfied with the results of the tests at La Fere. I see that the 9-inch Villantroys 
mortars, with 30 pounds of powder, were at 2,650 toises, and that the 11-inch mortar, with 45 pounds of 
powder, was at 2,980 toises, that is, to say nearly 3000 fathoms: it is a prodigious result. We must 
continue these tests with the greatest activity. I do not know what time has in common with events of 
such importance. The purpose of the tests must be to load the bombs, to determine the length of the 
rocket, and finally to push the discovered one to the end. 

So I want you to give orders to the era to continue” 





25 


Page 26 


experiment, and appoint a commission of artillery officers to preside over it. I do not object to you doing 
models of 10 inches and 12 inches to compare them with them; but I do not think that one must, without 
trials, compromise the great significance that has been obtained. 

I think we have to test big, to find the possibility to reach 3,500 toises. The English had the plan 
to spend this winter in the harbor of Hyeres; the shells thrown at the angle of 40 degrees, with pieces of 
36 and plate mortars, made them abandon this project. I wish to have these mortars at the Villantrors 
from 11 inches to ten, to place them at the different batteries of the lees of Hyeres and on the continent. I 
also think that it must be poured iron, the foundries of Isere; but I think we have to wait two or three 
months, until new experiences have learned what can be learned from this important discovery. 

I would need to place these mortars on the battery of La Perrotine, in the harbor of the 
Saumonards. I would need it at the battery of the Isle Madame, so that all the points of the harbor of the 
Kits, where enemy vessels can anchor, were beaten by these mortars. I would need it in the harbor of 
Morbihan, which, considering this new invention, I plan to occupy, and of which I wish to forbid the 
anchorage to the enemy. These three points are the most important. It will be necessary for the navy to 
put some on, which will be placed on bombardments, to prevent the enemy from anchoring in the harbor 
of the Basques, and even for the harbor of Hyeres. You will show my satisfaction to Colonel 
Villantroys, and you will propose a reward for this officer. As I look at every hundred fathoms as a very 
great advantage, take care that the trials are covered with the greatest mystery, so that the enemy will not 
know them; that the trials are done in secret, and that this is surrounded by a little quackery. 

I therefore desire that the tests be continued; let me be aware of all the sowing; that this be done 
exactly, so that we know what is the powder that we will have used and that we will test beforehand 
with the test-tube. As for the mortars of 10 and 12 inches, on the account that you will give me within 
two months, it can be done in Liege, Indret, on the Isere, and bronze in Douai. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.”° 


26 


Page 27 


18275. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE MARINE, AT PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


Count Decres, we have just discovered the means of firing bombs at 3,000 toises, an extremely 
valuable discovery under the maritime point of view. I will continue the trials, and in the course of 
January it will be necessary to have mortars in all the ports, placed on bombards, since from now on 
these bombards will reach a squadron at 3,000 fathoms; which could be of a useful result for the harbor 
of the Basques. It will undoubtedly send to the islands of Hyéres. It will be necessary to have some also 
at the Isle Madame, at the battery of the Perrotine, and in the harbor of the Kits, and at the mouths of the 
Gironde. I asked you if mad could not use these mortars to prohibit the harbor of Morbihan to the 
enemy. It seems to me that there are points outside the harbor of Brest where the enemy sometimes wets. 
Finally, make known the points where this discovery could be usefully applied. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18276. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Saiui-Cloud, November 20, 1811. 


Cousin, write to Generals Dorsenne, Caffarelli, and Thourenot, whom they follow in the country 
where they are a detestable system; that immense forces are gathered in villages against bands of 
brigands who are active, so that one is continually exposed to unpleasant events, while reverse should be 
done; that principal points should be occupied, and that from there should leave moving columns to 
pursue the brigands; that, if things were conducted in this way, we would avoid many particular 
misfortunes; that it is necessary to hasten to follow this plan and to make an active war against brigands; 
that the Vendée experience has proved that the best thing is to have mobile columns scattered and 
multiplied everywhere, and not stationary bodies, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war.”’ 


27 


Page 28 


18277, - TO THE COUNT COLLIN DE SUSSY, 
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF CUSTOMS, IN PARIS, 
Saint Cloud. November 20, 1811. 


Monsieur le Comte de Sussy, I receive your letter of today, I can only testify my astonishment of 
all this fiddling which is committed with the licenses of the police, I spoke to you myself, and you had 
charged to make sure of it, How come you do not have duplicates of these licenses? How is it that the 
ship Vigilance is not worn on the condition that you gave me the licenses of the police, nor on that of the 
minister? This state includes expired licenses and two new licenses for the Aparencia and the Bey, the 
one that was applicable to the Vigilance is therefore not worn, What the sea license that I see worn on 
the ship la Mary of Sieurs Loriol and Dagneau, of Dunkirk? What do these licenses mean? You must 
not recognize any license unless it is signed by me, when it would be that of a minister, even of one to 
whom you are specially subordinated. Finally, I see that exports are being smoked by the smugglers, 
which are offsetting themselves with the imports of ships carrying so-called police licenses; if there is a 
decision from me, I have nothing to say, but I do not know if my signature is not there, you are wrong. 
Since the institution of the council of commerce one must take my orders on everything, and my 
signature is always necessary. I very much approve that you had arrested Vigilance; have your license 
withdrawn. You tell me, that the Aparencia came on the 10th of October; Has his license been 
withdrawn? How did the Aparencia come? What was she responsible for? 

My license decree is reported, prepare me a very detailed account of these cases, where I want to 
see, very Clear, all the licenses of the police are now void, and you must take my orders directly. You 
will obtain information on Vigilance, its operations, its cargo, and you will report to me. 

I see in the state that the ship L'Esperance, belonging to Sieur Loriol, imported for 273,000 
francs goods, the export of which must be made by Wimereux. I am surprised to see that exports are 
allowed by the smugglers. You will want to put an end to this measure. The houses which have made 
imports must be held to equal exports; I do not want the smugglers' exports to compensate. 

According to the minute, Archives of the Empire.”* 





28 


Page 29 


18278. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 21, 1811. 


The Diadéme was not launched in Lorient, because it lacks cables. 

There is, in the direction of the Tanaro, on the reverse side of the Tende pass, a very considerable 
forest of green trees; exploitation is very easy. With 60,000 francs, we would make the road, and we 
would procure an immense quantity of cubic feet of wood. There must be information in your office on 
that. Many forests in the Alpes-Maritimes contain these woods that must be exploited. 

Near the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18279. - TO THE COUNT DE MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 22, 1811. 


I learn that a payment is imposed on the inhabitants of Cologne, for the mayor, for alleged 
expenses during my passage. No contribution must be imposed on citizens; report to me on that. 
From the minute, Archives of the Empire. 


18280. - TO THE COUNT BIGOT DE PREAMENEU, 
MINISTER OF CULTES, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 22, 1811. 


Count Bigot de Préameneu, let me know which seminaries are served by the Sulpicians, so as to 
distance them also from these seminaries. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Baroness de Nougaréde de Fayet, 


18281. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 23, 1811. 


I receive your work from November 22 on the service of the artillery of the Grande Armée, 


composed of: the observation corps of the Elbe, the reserve of cavalry, the observation corps of Italy, the 
corps of observation of the Ocean and the General Reserve of the Guard, forming” 


29 


Page 30 


512 guns, 176 regimental guns, total 688 guns, and having a total of 3,577 artillery wagons and 565 
regimental wagons, total 4,142 wagons. 

I suppose that all the material for this immense artillery is ready at Metz, Mainz, Wesel, Fere, 
and Strasbourg. 

You demand a return of 600 artillery horses; this is suitable. Present me a state of the companies 
to go up and the horses that you need; as it is, I believe, the minister of the administration of war who 
furnishes you the horses, I will understand them in the first order of return which will be ordered. To 
serve these 3,577 wagons, including the deck crew, 18,000 horses are needed: it is necessary that on 
January 30 these 115,000 horses exist harnessed and ready to leave. 

Four battalions of the train are in Germany, four are in France, two are in Italy, total ten; four 
companies of the Ist battalion bis exist at Metz, three companies of the 9th battalion bis are in Mainz, 
four companies of the 13th battalion bis are in Metz, total eleven companies, the value of two battalions; 
the battalion of the train of the kingdom of Italy; two battalions of the Guard; total fifteen battalions, 
which, at 1,500 horses per battalion, will make 22,500 horses; it only takes 18,000, so it's 4,500 more 
than you need. 

Present me the situation of the personnel of these train battalions on November 15th; put in them 
what they should receive from the conscription and what will be missing in full. Give me the same 
detailed information about the horses on the harnesses, and propose me a draft decree which orders, for 
1812, a return of artillery sufficient to complete all these frames, so that on the 30th of January I have, 
independently of the Italian train, all my battalions in full force and ready to leave. 

The heavens battalions that are in Italy would not be complete, so we must complete them. The 
purchase of horses in Italy presents difficulties; propose to me to complete the battalion which is with 
the army of Italy with the horses of the battalion which is in Piedmont, in order to bring them all the 
1,500 horses, and propose to me then to return to Besancon the battalion who is in Piéuront. A portion of 
the horses remaining in this battalion could even be sold to the kingdom of Italy, as the Viceroy would 
deem fit. By this means, all the battalions being in Germany or close to the Rhine, the return would be 
very rapid. In the work that you will give me on the return of the artillery teams, °° 


30 


Page 31 


I wish you to inform me of the sums to be borne for this expenditure in the budget of 1812, both for 
horses and for harnesses. 

I think it is necessary to confer on General Eble the command of this immense artillery; he will 
see there a special proof of my confidence. 

Make me a general state of the artillery thus organized. Compare me this park with the park I had 
during the campaign of Austerlitz, during that of Friedland and the time of Wagram. 

The observation corps of Italy is a corps apart which has not undergone any change; it must 
therefore be organized as it was. Some regiments were in Spain; but the remaining cadets have been 
increased. I will settle, at the moment of entering the campaign, the final composition of the infantry; but 
the artillery must remain the same. I suppose a battalion of the 1,300 horsepower train will suffice; with 
an Italian battalion that will make 3,000 horses. 

The ocean coast observation corps must keep the same artillery companies that are igneous in the 
work that I stopped: I do not approve of any changes, otherwise should always change. This corps will 
experience in the organization of its infantry changes which I will make known at the last moment; but 
that will have no influence on the composition of the artillery. 

I am currently coming to the observation corps of the Elbe. I desire in these states the following 
changes: 

The artillery equipment of the 6th Division will be sent without delay to Minden, where I think it 
is already; the equipment of the 8th will be sent to Munster, the equipment of the 9th at Wesel, the 
portion of the park belonging to the 8th and 9th divisions at Wesel; the two reserve batteries of the 
general park at Wesel; the artillery of two cavalry divisions at Wesel. The reserve park of the four 
cavalry divisions must be at Wesel and separated from the park belonging to the 8th and 9th divisions 
and the two reserve batteries, which is intended to be part of probably the Minden Park. This 
observation is important, so that the park of the four divisions remains always separated. 

I approve that the company of the 2nd regiment of horse artillery, which is in the 6th division, 
come back to the cavalry reserve and be replaced by a company from Spain. 

I approve of the choice of General Faure de Giere to command the artillery of the reserve; let 
him go to Wesel without delay, review his artillery and organize it well.” 





3 


Page 32 


I also approve of Colonel Bigot de Pont-Bodin for the job of Director of the Park. 

I approve of the artillery movement and the companies you propose to serve the 6th, 7th, 8th and 
9th divisions and the two new reserve batteries. These two divisions must be at Wesel, be part of the 
park of the observation corps of the Elbe and have nothing in common with the cavalry of the reserve. 
The four reserve batteries have eight howitzers and twenty-four pieces of 12. I want the howitzers to be 
Prussian or unicorn howitzers, which fire farther than ordinary howitzers. 

I approve that the four battalions of the artillery train which are in Germany are entirely destined, 
1“ in the service of the nine divisions, 2"4 in the service of the four batteries of the reserve on foot, 3% in 
the service of the general park of the corps observing the Elbe. I approve that the 8th Battalion be 
attached to the four reserve divisions and the reserve of the cavalry. 

The chief of the battalion whom you wish to send to Cadzand seemed to me zealous, and since 
the other senior officers will have all made war with the cavalry, there is nothing wrong with leaving 
him. 

You can therefore, without delay, order all the movements so that the artillery of the observation 
corps of the Elbe is organized according to the statements you have given me, except the modifications 
which are contained in the present letter. All that is necessary for the observation corps of the Elbe and 
the reserve of the cavalry must be started in the course of November to be returned in December to its 
destination. 

Lastly, in the new states which you will have me make of the artillery of the Grande Armée, you 
will make known to me what are the places where is the equipment of the reserve of the Guard and the 
corps of observation of the Ocean. 

In your next job, General Pernet will keep the command of the artillery of the corps of the Elbe. 
Five brigadier generals, including the general director of the park and the commander of the artillery of 
Danzig, will be employed in this army and will count on January Ist. 

You do not tell me what service General Martuschewitz is leaving. that you propose to me for 
the observation corps of the Elbe. 

The artillery of the Grand Army must have a general-in-chief, three generals of division, and ten 
brigade generals; Tput two or three more than it is strictly necessary, to be able to load a few seats and 
replace the losses.* 


32 


Page 33 


It is necessary to withdraw from Spain all those who are useless; remove General Taviel from 
Catalonia and one of the two Brigadier Generals there. 

In this project, the first artillery inspector would remain in France; what may be necessary for 
him to be able to go to the north and wherever the circumstances would make you think that his 
presence would become useful. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18282. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 23, 1811. 


The head of the administration of Antwerp has given his only daughter in marriage to the 
storekeeper of the navy; so that this store-keeper, whose accounting is more than four millions, has 
control only of his father-in-law. Order a special inquiry on this storekeeper and put it on the spot 
somewhere else. Show my dissatisfaction with that of the Councilors of State and the head of your 
offices, that it concerns you, that you have not noticed such impropriety, and that you have not 
immediately provoked measures for my service did not suffer. 

I also receive complaints about the engineer: he attributes to his incapacity and extreme 
negligence all that is happening in the Antwerp basin. 

It is believed that the commissioner in charge of the supplies is weak, dispelled, and allows to 
commit many abuses in his arsenal; it must be moved, and put in an arsenal like that of Anveri a man 
more important and safer. 

The director of the navy's provisions has town house and country house and makes great figure; 
he is suspected of squandering. 

The inspector does not do his duty with enough severity; he abandons his work to young people 
who are very dissipated. 

According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18283.-TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, 
MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 24, 1811. 


Count Mollien, we must prepare for the budget of 1812, a work which tends to clean the treasure 
of all that is not worth, of all that has been lent to the King of Spain and the Spanish princes,** 


33 


Page 34 


which is not included in any budget, of what is given to Russia, and finally of all the non-securities of 
the treasury of which there is nothing to hope for. I will see how to create an extraordinary resource to 
cover all that. 


NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18284. - TO M. GAUDIN, DUKE OF GAETE, 
MINISTER OF FINANCE, PARIS. 
St. Cloud, November 24, 1811. 


Mr. Duke de Gaete, I refer you your work. It is necessary to relate in the draft decree what I have 
granted for the road to Wesel; it seems to me that 2 millions have already been assigned to the works of 
this road. The report must embrace the whole question. 


NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Mr. Lefebvre, bookseller. 


18285. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
St. Cloud, November 24, 1811. 


My Cousin, I receive your letter of the 18th. The state of situation that you send me can not be 
what I want, since all the conscripts of the Wesel and Strasbourg depots had not yet arrived at the date of 
this state. Send me a part of the situation of the corps to November 15th. 

I think it is advantageous that you keep General Compans to order a good reserve. I will take 
care of the generals to send to the 6th, 8th and 9th divisions of your army. 

When I told you to operate alone, it was not that I did not intend to go to the army, if the war was 
going on; but war can have several acts. It is possible that I resolve to send your army on the Vistula to 
join the Poles and Saxons, putting your headquarters in Danzig, and that without beginning the 
hostilities, in the time that the corps of observation of the Rhine, the observation corps of Italy and my 
Guard would march on forced marches to meet on the Elbe. You feel that you need to be organized in 
artillery and engineering to be able to cope. I am perfectly of your opinion that, during the time I leave 
you with the nine divisions, you have two lieutenants general, who may be divisional generals. 
Moreover, these hypotheses are still** 





34 


Page 35 


distant, and I will decide at the last moment. You would thus have a vanguard of 150,000 infantry, more 
than 30,000 cavalry and four to five hundred pieces of cannon; which would make you an army of 
nearly 200,000 men. I will be within reach of you with 200,000 others. 

I asked you to put some artillery companies and staff officers in the squares. Send a good 
regiment of French infantry to Glogau; which will allow you to push on Magdeburg the battalions of the 
46th, the 19th and others which are sent to you. It seems to me that these broom lions would be good in 
the citadel of Magdeburg. The cadres being good, these battalions would form quickly by doing little 
service; you would put them under the orders of a general who would take special care of them. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18286. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 25, 1811, 


It is necessary that you give orders so that, under no pretext, one does not allow to print any 
letter of me, true or false, It is also necessary that one takes a particular care that, in the works which 
print, we do not put anything that can make known the strength of our troops or anything relative to our 
military means. 

From the minute, Archives of the Empire. 


18287. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 25, 1811. 


Count Decres, it is asserted that there are many of our prisoners on the rock of Cabrera, and that 
a frigate who would go on this rock would save a large number of these unfortunate prisoners, Report to 
me on the different expeditions which are preparing in our ports for Batavia and the Indies, 

I wish I could send two frigates to cross to the United States of America, and whose goal would 
be to go to the continent of America's insurgency to bind correspondence and carry guns. We> 


35 


Page 36 


could send other frigates to cross the coasts of America, where it seems to me that there are many things 
to do. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18288, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, IN PARIS, 
St. Cloud, November 25, 1811. 


I have a very beautiful map translated from Russia; it will be necessary for you to get one like 
this. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18289. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
St. Cloud, November 25, 1811. 


Cousin, I can see from the state of the Polish army on the 1st of November, that the 5th, 10th, 
and 11th infantry regiments, which should be 3,500 men, are only 2,500 or 2,600 men. I suppose, 
however, the 4th battalions are formed; therefore, I do not see what precludes these regiments from 
being complete. I see that the 9th cavalry regiment is only 400 horses; what prevents him from being 
1,000 horses? Make sure that the bodies are promptly completed. Men must not fail, since the Duchy 
has four million inhabitants, and that Duchy should be able to offer 70,000 men. I see with difficulty the 
complaints of the Poles about the misery of their army. Poles do not pay 42,000 men; it is not 10,000 
men per million inhabitants. You will confess to me that there must be some disorder so that such a 
populous country can not pay so few troops, since the division in Spain and the one in Danzig do not 
count. Write to Prince Poniatowski to make him feel how ridiculous it is. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmihl. 


18290. - NOTES 
DICTATES IN TRADE AND MANUFACTURING BOARD, 
St. Cloud, November 25, 1811. 


His Majesty deals with the proposal made by the English to receive*® 


36 


Page 37 


wine, obtaining the exportation of sugar in the proportion of a barrel of wine for twelve quintals of 
sugar. 

The Minister of the Interior will give a report on the proposal made by the English; he will 
examine whether we can deceive the exportation of wine. 

Licenses would be given to bring to Bordeaux only 120,000 quintals, weight of marc, raw sugar, 
and not ground or refined sugar, as opposed to 10,000 tons of wine. The building would be French, the 
crew too, the Prussian flag or whatever. 

The building and the merchant will be named in the license. He will have to export such quantity 
of wine (up to 10,000 barrels), and the quantity he will have to import will be stated in the license. The 
trading house will be subject to prosecution in the customs courts if the wine is thrown away, if it is 
deceived in the load or if more sugar is imported. 

An operation of 120,000 quintals of sugar, being too considerable, will be divided by tenths. At 
the same time, licenses will be given to import 12,000 quintals of sugar against 1,000 tons of wine; it 
will be the subject of five or six licenses. 

Traders will be able to export anything that is allowed, such as millstones, clover seeds, etc. 
Then it would be an export of | million francs, a movement of four or five buildings, and a sugar import 
of a mediocre value. One-third of the silks would be exported. 

It is proposed to bring in wool, leathers, potash, medicines, cinchona, raw copper. It is necessary 
to determine the quantities which will be made of them; then these quantities would be divided by 
licenses and in tenths, in order to be able at each moment to see where one would be. 

The objects of exportation would be wine, brandy, all manufactures, so that half or one-third of 
the export would consist of objects which England does not care to receive, and the rest in objects she 
needs, like cheese, clover seed, etc. The licenses should be distributed between Amsterdam, Rotterdam, 
Ostend and Le Havre; it would be necessary to make this distribution, and fix the report of the various 
objects which will have to compose the loadings. 

In the report that the minister will make on this subject, he will indicate the rights that these 
operations will provide to customs. 

The Minister will present at the same time a draft license for the export of wine, and one for the 
introduction of leather, potash, etc.?” 





37 


Page 38 


The Emperor will grant entry by cotons-Motril Coins coming from Malaga and Valencia, when 
one will be master of these two cities, with permissions of the consuls and commanders. By land as well 
as by sea, everything will be taken to Bayonne and put in warehouse. The total of the transaction will be 
inserted in the minutes of the council of commerce to form part of the Customs budget of 1812, and 
licenses will be given in tenths. It will be necessary to export manufactured silks for an equal amount. 
The quota of fees to be charged for the introduction of these cottons, either by land or by sea, will be 
proposed. 

The regulations of Holland seem to contain very good things; it should be adopted for the whole 
of France. 

It would be necessary to propose the total suppression of the supervisors; allow fishing for two, 
three, four days without returning; to oblige to return to such a port, to put the boats on the ground, and 
to arrive there only, unless necessary; to organize on these points a gendarmerie brigade, a 
reinforcement of the customs and a surveillance of the police. 

This system would not interfere with fishing, and it is more advantageous than the present 
system, since it will not be open to a fisherman from Dieppe to keep his boat ashore a quarter of a 
league from the port. 

There is nothing to be feared from the fishermen except smuggling and the passage of spies and 
malevolent ones; but the greatest security is to watch for their arrival, their departure, and to keep them 
in one place. Spies coming out of Dieppe left their boat in a nearby cove; and threw it to the sea without 
being seen. 

If any fisherman were to leave a given point, the question would have been cleared up; add to 
this that there must be established on these sworn labor court points, obliged to declare all that comes to 
their knowledge; they would be real supervisors who would not cost anything. 

It is necessary to designate, and this is an important thing, the points from which the boats would 
go; they would always be designated far from points where there are wheel; never to Texel, to Flushing, 
to Brest, & c. And indeed, unless they are fishermen for the harbor of Toulon, for example, what does it 
matter to them to be in Saint-Nazaire? They will have no knowledge of what is being done in the harbor. 
Those who leave Toulon, on the contrary, would know that food, men, etc. are loaded. 

To make this system complete, it is necessary to foresee the extraordinary cases and to authorize 
the admiral, the captain commander to the divisions, the general commanding a department, to prevent 
the departure and fo” 





38 


Page 39 


put the embargo on fishermen; order them to give an account of it without delay, so that in a week the 
ministers will be informed of it. 

This power can be limited to officers of such rank in the navy and to land commanders, and then 
the fishermen would be freed from the vexations of subordinate commanders. 

According to the copy. Archives of agriculture, commerce and public works. 


18291. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 27, 1811. 


Have an artillery manual containing shooting tables showing the range of the guns and that of the 
gun from all angles. We will make special tables for ricochet shooting; we will join tables for firing the 
rifle. The second part will contain details on the construction of the batteries, the location of each thing, 
the care to be taken to make the most of the batteries, finally a meeting of old and modern maxims on 
the shooting which can serve as an instruction to officers. This manual should not be, as you see, the 
manual of the smelter, the forger, the chemist, or the manufacturer; it must contain what is necessary to 
know, not to make arms, but to use them. However, I do not accept bullet and bullet cartridges, infantry 
cartridges, bolts, rockets for any kind of bomb, on whose manufacture the manual must give instruction. 
This manual should not be more than one volume. It must be done with care and clarity. It is a work that 
every officer and sergeant of artillery must be able to carry in his pocket. The exercise of the 
maneuvering of the pieces, found everywhere, will complete all that knowledge is indispensable to the 
true and principal officer of artillery. It is necessary to make known, in the tables of fire, the ratio of the 
lines, inches and feet of rise, with the angles under which one draws. 

I can hardly see what is called a howitzer at the Villantroys what must be called a mortar. The 
idea of shells is attached to the ricochet, but we can not ricochet with this huge machine; we must name 
this piece mortar Villantroys. 

Napoleon. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.” 


39 


Page 40 


18292. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 29, 1811. 


We complain to Brest that the food of the sailors is bad. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18293. - IN THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 30, 1811. 


When will the fairyard be started in Marseille under Fort Saint-Nicolas? 

The Lycée de Marseille has a bad organization; it does not inspire confidence in the 
inhabitants. In general, high schools do not work as well as they should. 

The granting of Marseilles loads too much the common fish destined for the people; it 
should be reduced. 

The engineer of the department of Bouches-du-Rhone is negligent; it should be changed; 
also the routes are very bad. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18294. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 30, 1811 


Sieur Terra-Labor, a septuagenarian, a former lieutenant-colonel of artillery in the 
service of Naples, distinguished himself at Porto-Ercole in the affair against the English frigates. 
Testify my satisfaction to this officer and let him know that I give him the Legion of Honor. 
Make all of this a good article in the Moniteur (1). Offer me rewards for the weapons 
commander, the officers and the burghers who have behaved well. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18295. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, November 30, 1811. 


Brigadier General Bessiéres, whom I have appointed Major General, does not believe 
that he has the necessary experience for this rank and wishes 





1) See the Moniteur of December 5, 181 iB 


40 





Page 41 


to make some campaigns in the rank of Brigadier General. That being the case, please send me 
back my decree and look at it as not present. Order this general, as Brigadier General, to proceed 
to St. Germain's division at Hanover, where he will command a brigade of cuirassiers. 

You can tell General Nansouty that he is master of coming back, leaving the command of 
each of the divisions of cuirassiers to the oldest brigadier general. 

I appointed Brigadier Doumerc General of Division; give him the order to go to Erfurt to 
take command of the 3rd Division of Cuirassiers. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18296. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL, OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 30, 1811. 


I sent you several models for the flags; you did not report to me about it; Come talk to 
me tomorrow. Bring me the state of all the regiments of the army, with the name of the battles in 
which everyone has been. The Minister of War has not understood my idea, and moreover he is 
not in a position to do this work; he put all the battles in the 26th, although this regiment was not 
there. Each regiment must speak on its flag only the names of battles in which it has been found; 
regiments that have not been at any battle must not be named on their flag. Only you can do this 
job, and do it carefully; present it to me without delay. 

I have charged you with the details of the flags. I give only one per regiment of infantry; 
one per cavalry regiment; one per regiment of artillery, and one per regiment of gendarmerie; 
point to departmental companies or guards of honor or others. No one must have an eagle unless 
he has received it from the hands of the Emperor. All other bodies must wear pennants. Any 
infantry corps of less than 1,000 men and any body of cavalry that does not have 500 men can 
not have an eagle. 

All the regiments of infantry having had one eagle per battalion, and the regiments of 
cavalry one by squadron, these eagles will be sent, except one, to Paris, and deposited with the 
Invalides, until they can be put in the Temple of Glory. Each infantry battalion will have a 
pennant where there will be nothing written. The"! 





41 





Page 42 


four battalions of the regiment will have the pennant of different color. 

The eagle of each regiment will have its two armed bearers, independently of a pair of pistols on 
the chest, a sponge, whose dimensions must be determined, so that it is a good weapon. This snake will 
have a banner to frighten the horses and that can be seen from afar. 

The eagle will have a sort of pennant like the one they have today, but of a very solid double silk, 
and where will be embroidered, on one side, the names of the battles where the regiment will have been, 
and on the other, these words: the Emperor Napoleon at such a regiment. These pennants will be made 
without delay and sent to all the corps of the army which must receive them. This can be renewed every 
two or three years, without renewing the eagle. One regiment will be allowed to ask another when its 
will be destroyed, which will be sent to me on my approval. 

I had ordered that the city of Paris made gold laurel wreaths for the regiments which were at the 
battle of Austerlitz; inform the prefect where they are, in order to use them. Be sure to take care of all 
this and that it will be finished by next Thursday. You will bring me the decree with the state of the 
regiments; because the part of the flags of the regiments is today in a great chaos. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18297. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL, OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. November 30, 1811. 


As major general of the Great Army, you owe a relation of all the events of the campaigns of 
Ulm, Austerlitz, Iena, Friedland and those of Eckmiihl and Wagram; however, you have not made any 
relationship. It is necessary that you take care of this duty relentlessly, and that you employ it four or 
five hours a day; otherwise, nothing will be left of these campaigns. Bulletins made hastily are 
insignificant, and no coin is there. It would be necessary first to print a collection of these bulletins, 
retouching them, making disappear the things which were recognized as false, by correcting some errors 
of style, and putting after the pieces of staff, such as the state of the prisoners, the flags, the cannons, the 
general officers, the colonels, the lieutenant-colonels who were taken, the newspapers of siege, the 
capitulations” 


42 





Page 43 


as a rule, the names of the regiments that were in each case. That would be done quickly, and that would 
be a first thing; which would not dispense you from a more serious work, which it is your duty to do 
without delay, and which would be independent of the particular relations with which you are now 
concerned. This relation would be made without maps or plans; it would be a staff diary from which one 
could draw. At least, with these two books, there will be something left. We will put, day by day, the 
place where each corps was and what it did. You have the reports of each marshal; There are many 
special cases where I did not find myself. You will put those relationships in order, asking for those that 
may have remained in my office, and we will see if we can print that. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18298, - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Saint-Cloud, November 30, 1811. 


Cousin, I receive your letter of November 25th. I am totally opposed to the idea that you are 
demonstrating in the staffs five officers who would have served in Austria. I do not understand that: 
leave them in the regiments where I have placed them. I want in the staffs only men who, since 1789, 
have not left the French flags. If you had caught them, send them back right away. Far from it, | have a 
review done to ascertain the number of these men in our ranks, my intention being to keep them in 
special regiments. I do not want to worry about the loyalty of my army. Nor do I approve of putting 
officers coming out of Austrian service into French regiments. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18299. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Saint-Cloud, November 30, 1811. 


My Son, I receive your letter of November 23rd. You command my army of Italy; consequently, 
the magazine inspector must obey the orders you give him, so long as they are not contrary to the rules 
of the accounts. It is absurd to want” 





43 


Page 44 


remove the epaulets from the voltigeurs, hold them since they are useful. As you say very well, the 
inspector can make claims when it comes to these epaulettes in the accounts. I do not have time to read 
all the circulars, and I will be careful not to have them sent to me, because the minister would think 
himself in order. Since you have them, make an excerpt, and send it to me with your notes. On the 
observations you have made to me about the pomegranate caps, I have not kept the sea urchin bonnets, 
because these furs come from Canada, and because it is very inconvenient in war; but I ordered that a 
higher and more ornate shako model be made which distinguishes grenadiers from voltigeurs. Like you, 
I attach great importance to maintaining this distinction. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18300. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 2, 1811. 


Cousin, I answer one of your questions of November 26th. If the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, 
which has more than 4 million inhabitants, can not feed its troops, in spite of all the advantages that I 
make him by favoring his loan, which has already given him several millions, by feeding, paying and, 
dressing up the division which he has in Spain, which is a quarter of his infantry, I can not understand 
how this country can pretend to become a nation. 

I'm responding to one of your last letters, November 28th. The Germans complain that all these 
noises of insurrection of Germany are fomented by the French, who, by dint of talking about it and 
warming themselves up on this object, will eventually make you believe it. They complain that you told 
Rostock that you would be able to prevent Germany from becoming a Spain; that as long as you 
command there, you would not dare to undertake anything. These words are a real pain. There is nothing 
in common between Spain and the provinces of Germany. Spain would have been reduced for a long 
time without her 60,000 English, without her 1,000 leagues of coast, which makes our armies 
everywhere on the frontiers, and finally without the 100 millions provided by America, for England is 
not in a position to provide him with money. But, as in Germany there is no America, neither the sea, 
nor an immense quantity of fortresses and 60,000 English, there are™* 


44 


Page 45 


nothing to fear, the German was even as idle, as lazy, as murderer, as superstitious, as much delivered to 
the monks as the people of Spain, where there were 300,000 monks. Judge, then, what there is to fear 
from a people so wise, so reasonable, so cold, so tolerant, so far removed from all excesses that there is 
no example that a man has been murdered in Germany during the war. Austria was much more likely to 
be revolutionized. The effects proved the lack of foundation of the fears that one wanted to conceive. It 
is, therefore, very unfortunate that the generals of these chimeras are maintained, and that comparisons 
are allowed to circulate in the country, which can only do harm, without producing any good. If there 
was a movement in Germany, it would end up being for us and against the little princes. 

As for Westphalia, the people of Hesse, who is the principal, are far from regretting the elector, 
the army is attached to the King. It will be advantageous for you to be more amenable towards the 
Westphalian Government and the King; it is better to conciliate than to be angry. 

I do not know why Rapp interferes with what does not concern him; there are only two facts in 
his report: 1‘ that Kotzebue made a pamphlet; 2™ that the English have made another, which is entitled 
Campaign of Portugal. He had to give you an account of these two facts and not talk about anything 
else. What will he talk about what is happening in Hungary, the spirit that drives the Confederation and 
these countries, he who is so far away! Let him confine himself to his government, let him meddle with 
his own interests, and confine himself to realizing to me Danzig and the surrounding countries. Please 
do not give me such rhapsodies in front of me. My time is too precious for me to lose in dealing with 
such nonsense. You probably do not pretend that I am acquainted with what is happening in Hungary 
and Austria by reports from Danzig, especially transmitted by such a weak man, of which I do not care 
much, except for a day's business. only Rapp, all this serves only to waste my time and dirty my 
imagination with absurd pictures and suppositions. You had to send me the extract from Rapp's report 
and say in two words: General Rapp tells me that a pamphlet, entitled Country of Portugal, is spread by 
the English (libel of which we have 1,000 copies), and that Kotzebue did another one. 

What you should recommend to General Rapp is that generals are not interested in privateers, 
and that these pirates 


45 





Page 46 


do not abuse this to ravage coasts and commit unjust things which then engage me in years of quarrels. 
An officer must not appear in such undertakings, especially a general whose provisional decisions have 
influence over the matter. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmihl. 


18301. - TO MADAME LA COMTESSE DE MONTESQUIOU, 
GOVERNOR OF THE HOUSE OF CHILDREN OF FRANCE, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 3, 1811. 


Countess de Montesquiou, on the report you gave us of the satisfaction you have with the service 
of the lady Boubers, under the governess of our children, and Baron de Canisy, our squire, we have 
granted to the lady Boubers an endowment of 10,000 francs a year, and to the baron de Canisy a 
supplementary sum of 6,000 francs. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by General Count de Montesquiou-Fezensac. 


18302, - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 4th, 1811. 


If the naval gunners were organized in such a way that, in the place of a colonel, they had 
nothing but a major at the head of the regiment administration, and that the rank of colonel or chief was 
suppressed. battalion and adjutant major of the battalion; that there were only two officers per company, 
namely: out of six companies, three captains, three second captains, three lieutenants and three 
lieutenants in the second, which would produce the suppression of 2 officers per company; if these 
changes were made, what would be the economy in terms of salaries, mass of accommodation, 
allowances for fodder, heating, & c. ? Since on boarding 120 gunners one embarks only one officer, it 
seems useless to have more than two, and this great quantity of unemployed senior officers is a bad 
effect. 

The training of naval gunners is mediocre. Their polygon at Brest, at Lorient, at Toulon, is not 
organized satisfactorily; they have no mortars of different calibers; they are not sufficiently exercised. I 
want you to report to me, because I attach great importance to perfecting the cannon.”° 


46 





Page 47 


I desire a report, 1“ on sea guns; our enemies reproach us with firing to dismay, while they 
constantly aim to sink; 2™ on hollow ball shooting; Experiments made at all times have proved the 
advantage of these balls and the satisfactory result that must be promised for the vessels; cs on the 
misuse which has been introduced to disgorge the cartridges in the middle of the fight to reduce the 
charge, a disastrous habit to which the English attribute the large number of accidents that arrive on 
board our vessels. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18303. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 4, 1811. 


I have read with interest your report on the organization of the artillery crew of the new Grand 
Army, consisting of five hundred and twelve artillery pieces of line, one hundred and seventy-six 
regimental artillery pieces, forming a total of 3,559 artillery wagons and 804 regimental wagons. 

Give orders that what is worn in the states as belonging to the Elbe Observation Corps and the 
Cavalry Reserve be directed to Wesel, Miinster and Minden. I authorize you to return after this, under 
the sheds, the cars destined for the observation corps of Italy and the Ocean and the Guard; Of course, 
you will direct the staff and the teams to the different points where the equipment is, so that, within eight 
days of giving the order, the wagons can be recharged on the spot and put themselves on the spot-the- 
field running for their destination. We would also have the advantage of seeing the cars again, so that 
they would be in better shape when they should be used. There must be enough churches and shops in 
Verona to store the entire train of the observation corps of Italy. 

I approve of all the arrangements and movements you propose for the 7th Main Battalion and the 
7th Battalion A bis. The army of Italy will thus have 1,500 horses, and the 7th main battalion, complete 
in men, will arrive at Besancon in time to take horses. In the valuations you only mention the value of 
the 600 horses which you yield to the kingdom of Italy; you carry the deficit to 7,600 horses; but, in the 
number of 19,600 horses you are asking for, you understand the*’ 


47 


Page 48 


2,200 Italian horses; removing them, you will then need only 17,400 horses; instead of 7,600 horses, 
only 5,400 would be needed. I took a decree that you will receive to buy 8,820 horses in three successive 
orders. 

The number of infantry caissons seems to me greater than at any time during the campaigns of 
the Grand Army. Some supply wagons could, if necessary, be left behind. 

As for the staff, I do not think it's necessary to take companies in Amsterdam or Delfzyl: these 
companies must be ruined; you have to take other companies. These men will be poorly and hardly 
available of the year. 

As to the general officers of the artillery, having withdrawn two of the Army of Catalonia, I 
think that General Bourgeat could also be withdrawn from the Army of the South. It would be possible 
for General Nourry to be available. We must leave General d'Aboville, who seems necessary. The 
distribution which you present of the different generals of artillery seems to me proper; in the meantime, 
leave them in their posts, except Generals Pernety, de Giere, Baltus, Martuschewitz, another General 
instead of General d'Aboville, and Generals Lepin and Jouffroy, who are necessary to the observation 
corps of the Elbe el to the cavalry reserve. Leave the others on leave or use them for the general need. 
General Charbonnel could replace the elder general Aboville. General d'Arancey could be in charge of 
the details of the siege crew, under the command of the general commander-in-chief of the artillery. 

There remain the pontonniers; propose me a general to put at the head of the bridges, the artillery 
staff officers, and the pontoon companies, the workmen, who will be attached to the crew. 

Make the changes-for the artillery generals and for the staff of the ocean observation corps, by 
putting companies which have not been in Holland this year. Put in the park one or two companies of the 
9th, because it is good to leave in France as much as possible old French. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18304. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 


MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 4th, 1811. 


All about the Grand Army's artillery crew*® 





48 





Page 49 


is organized, except the bridge service; this service must be organized very widely. Pontoons are 
required for each corps and means for repairing bridges; it is then necessary to the general direction of 
the bridges. My intention is to have, harnessed and following the army, the boats, tackles and materials 
necessary to lay two bridges over the Vistula; let me know how many horses are needed for this. 

There will be at the artillery park a battalion of marine workers, consisting of six companies and 
840 men, a crew of 1,200 men; which will make 2,000 sailors who will be attached to the deck crews. It 
is absolutely necessary that the deck crew have the necessary wagons to carry the tools of these 800 
workers. 

The artillery office, before presenting me with the formation of the deck crew, should consult 
with the engineering office, so that there is no duplication and that it works out. 

Engineers must ensure that there are as many pioneering tools and objects as needed to repair 
bridges. 

A battalion of 800 men's marine workers will be attached to the Engineering Park; he must have 
all that is necessary to quickly throw a bridge over stilts. 

One of these bridge crews must exist in Danzig. I am assured that there is one in Magdeburg. If 
necessary, a second must be built at Danzig; I suppose we have the anchors and all that is necessary. 

I want you to introduce me to the bridge crew project at the same time as the engineering crew. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18305. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL, OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 5, 1811. 


Cousin, write to Marshal Suchet to complain that his wife's correspondence with Madame 
Saligny speaks of what is happening to his army; that these details must not be found in the letter of a 
woman, who must know neither the strength of the troops nor the movements which are made, but to 
speak of her health, that is all. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.” 


49 





Page 50 


18306. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 5, 1811, 


Count Decres, give the necessary orders that on the 10th of December, the frigates La Clorinde 
and Pregel, and the corvette l'Aigrette, be ready to leave, under the command of Captain Bouvet, to go 
to Java. Write the instructions of this officer in accordance with what the council has decided, which you 
report to me on your report of the 4th, and submit them to my signature. 

You will embark on the frigate La Clorinde: 1“ one hundred and twenty men of the 
Expeditionary Battalion of Brest; Sergeants-majors, sergeants, corporals, and corporals-quartermasters, 
who are of good will; the remainder of the hundred and twenty men will be completed by soldiers who 
can read and write, and being in the best condition of being useful to the colony; laa captain or a 
lieutenant of goodwill, taken from among the officers of the naval gunners, under the age of thirty-five, 
and having service and capability, and four sergeants or sergeant majors of naval artillery, men of good 
will, having services and experience; 3" a second captain of the artillery of land, a lieutenant and a 
second lieutenant, taken from those who are at Rennes, of good will; which will make eight officers and 
sub-officers of artillery; 4"" a captain of the engineers, with a lieutenant and a second lieutenant; 5" two 
lieutenants or sub-lieutenants of infantry, of good will, taken in the 3rd of the line or in the 20th light, 
who are at Brest, among the most capable officers; 6a brigadier general, capable of commanding the 
infantry of the colony, and more skilful than the one who was sent, with his two aides-de-camp; this 
brigadier-general shall be appointed by the minister of war; 7" five naval administrators and treasury 
employees, young men fit to keep the writings; these employees will be appointed by you or by the 
maritime prefect of Brest in the extent of its borough. 

The frigate Pregel will embark the same number of men and officers and employees; but, instead 
of taking a brigadier general, she will take two adjutants and a colonel of artillery; this officer will be 
commissioned to command the artillery of the colony. Choose a distinguished officer who can fulfill this 
important function. 

Finally, the corvette /'Aigrette will take only half of these passengers, and, instead of a colonel, 
he will take a battalion commander from” 


50 





Page 51 


a engineer, a man of experience, and capable of commanding the engineers of the colony. 

The Clorinda and Pregel will each take on board the following cargo: 1,500 rifles, 1,500 spare 
parts, 100 rifles, 200 pairs of pistols, 150 light cavalry sabers, copper and other useful objects of interest 
to the colony. 

The corvette the Egret will take only half of this load; which will make 750 rifles, 750 spare 
parts, etc. 

NANTES EXPEDITION. A similar expedition will leave Nantes, composed of the Ariane and 
Andromache frigates and the brig Mameluk. 

The Ariane will embark at Nantes: 1“ sixty men taken from the non-commissioned officers and 
soldiers of the Angers depot and sixty chosen men, namely: twenty of the best of the 121st line depot, 
which is at Blois, and thirty in the 5th battalion of the 122nd, which is at Vendome, and with these men 
a lieutenant, a second lieutenant, four sergeants, and four corporals; 2" three officers and sub-officers of 
the land artillery, and three officers and sub-officers of the naval artillery, taken at Lorient or at Nantes; 
3" three artists, of those whose kind of talent may be most useful to the colony; 4" ten administrative 
officers, whom you will designate or choose in Nantes. 

The Andromache will embark the same number of officers and employees and sixty men 
captured at the Angers depot and sixty others chosen, namely: thirty in the depot of the 26th line, which 
is at Napoleon, and thirty in the 7th battalion from the 82nd, which is at La Rochelle. 

You will have the same cargo on each of these frigates as on Clorinda and Pregel; and, 
independently of the copper, you will embark on the two expeditions 20,000 francs in piastres, which 
will be given to the captain, so that, if the frigates were to be taken, this sum could pass as belonging to 
the captain. 

If the brig Mameluk can carry men, we will put on board thirty workers taken at Nantes, from 
those who may be most useful to the colony. 

The two expeditions, arriving, will bring to the colony a supply of 6,400 rifles, & c. 

Dutch captain Melvill Carnbee will command the Nantes expedition. 

You will prepare the corvette La Coquette, which is at the Passage, to bring to Batavia forty men, 
a thousand rifles and a°! 








Page 52 


proportionate quantity of spare parts, rifles, sabers and pistols, copper and news. This corvette will leave 
after one of the two expeditions is gone. 

You will take care to put on each frigate a collection of a year of the Moniteur and Gazettes of 
Holland; bring together a large collection of these, so that all the details of my trip are known in the 
colony. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18307. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris December 5, 1811. 


My intention is that three frigates, under the command of a good officer and with good 
instructions, leave the port of Toulon, with twelve vessels laden with flour and rice, for Barcelona. It is 
necessary that the convoy arrives by a decided time, avoiding the coasts of Rosas and coming rather on 
the side of Tortosa; that the frigates approach very near Barcelona, so as to bring the convoy's vessels 
into the light of day. Immediately issue orders for the loading of food. It is necessary that before 20 
December this convoy be ready to leave. Send your order by the courier to Lyon, where it will be sent to 
Toulon by a special courier. Tortosa, Taragoue belong to us: these ports can receive frigates. 

Order the officer who orders La to make as many expeditions as he can for Barcelona and 
cabotage: there are times and circumstances when expeditions made by people accustomed to this 
journey can succeed. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18308. - TO MARSHAL DAVUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Paris. December 5, 1811. 


Cousin, I'm getting your letter on Modlin's work. Since the crown A can not be completed this 
year, we must finish the telescope No. 19 and put it in a state of defense; it is only 300 fathoms from 
arrow No. 27 and 100 fathoms from the river, and the enemy can only seize it by opening the trench.” 





52 





Page 53 


will be able to do it only after its siege crew has arrived and put in measure for this operation, It is very 
interesting to be master of this point n° 19 as long as it is possible, since by this position one is master 
also from the Vistula bridge. So give orders so that the book No. 19, with a good blockhouse at the 
throat, able to hold 100 men, be made without delay and armed. Then, as soon as possible, we must 
finish crown A, because we must, above all, make sure the bridge, since this is the main goal of all the 
place of Modlin. It is seen from the general profile that the gorge of the square dominates more than 60 
feet Kazun's work, so it is not likely that the enemy is housed in this work, under the fire of the entire 
gorge of the square. Moreover, nothing will prevent the establishment of a front ditch, wide and full of 
water, which offers an obstacle to the assault that one would like to give to this bridgehead. 

I see with pleasure that the place is supplied; it must be for six months. 3 to 4,000 garrison men 
seem sufficient to me, to wit: an entire regiment, two companies of sappers, four companies of artillery, 
a squadron of cavalry, and finally a company of deposit of each regiment, which will make 1,500 men 
of deposit; in all 4,000 men. The service must not be done by guards who get up, but by battalions or 
companies which remain stationary in bastions, half-moons and counter-guards; it is the Turkish 
method; it is the best for defense and the most economical in men. Thus, for example, a half-battalion of 
the defense of the crown C would be charged; he would settle there, would always have there half or a 
third of his world of service, during the day, all these men would work to fortify the post which they 
would have to defend and would put it with eagerness in the best possible state; at night, everyone 
would still be there. The infantry would furnish the number of men necessary to serve the artillery of 
this part of the place. You understand the advantages that this service must have over the ordinary 
method, where positions are relieved every 24 hours; which makes the soldier settle badly and has no 
interest in fortifying the post where he is. You must therefore give instructions that, if the siege were to 
take place, an officer and a portion of the garrison should be charged to the defense of each front; the 
soldiers would stay there forever. As there is a great quantity of wood at Modlin, the master soldiers 
would be allowed to arm themselves, by pressing the wood against the slope of the rampart; which will 
make barracks easy to build, perfectly safe from the bomb, and in which” 


53 


Page 54 


the soldiers will be able to sleep in case of bombing. The barracks will remain available for hospitals 
and the reserve; by this means, instead of 300 workers a day for genius, a number which we see in the 
memoir, there would be 3,000 a day; for, apart from the sentinels and some grand guards, everybody 
would work; in the same way, instead of 200 servants for the artillery, there would be 3,000; everyone 
would practice serving the parts that must defend the portion of the place that will be entrusted to them. 
Give instruction accordingly and correct all these ideas. 

As the book of the artillery was not attached to the state, I can not judge of its situation; but give 
orders that the coins of 24 which are useless in Warsaw be sent to Modlin; that only the smallest number 
of necessary pieces should be left at Praga, and that Modlin should be armed with pieces of 24, 12, and 
howitzers; Cartridges, weapons, etc .; put a general to command, officers of the engineers, artillery, 
commissioners of wars; finally, to put the place in the best state of defense in every respect, without 
waiting at the last moment. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18309, - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 6, 1811. 


It is necessary to provide constantly for the defense of the borders of the 10th military division, 
that is to say, the departments of the Pyrenees-Orientales, Ariége, Haute-Garonne and Hautes-Pyrénées, 
It must be provided by three means: 

1“ The formation of the National Guard in these four departments, according to the laws. Give 
me, as a result, the draft decrees necessary for this object; present me the appointments of colonels for 
legions and battalion commanders for corpses. I will send a senator who will be responsible for the other 
appointments and the organization according to the bases that I will order. 

You will organize the bodies by sub-prefectures. This national guard thus organized in these four 
departments must, I believe, give nearly 45,000 men. 

6,000 rifles will be distributed to all National Guards who are in the adjoining sub-prefectures 
and one march from the border.** 





54 





Page 55 


They will be exercised on Sundays, so that each event may have 6,000 men in arms. Municipalities of 
the communes will be responsible for rifles. There will be depots of cartridges, and at the alarm signal 
the National Guards will march to the aid under the command of the Commanding General. 

2™ Each of these four bordering departments will furnish two elite battalions to six companies of 
150 men; in total, 900 men per battalion; which will make, for the four departments, a manpower of 
7,200 men. They will be under the orders of the senator, and paid, dressed, organized as they have been 
in the North. 

The departments of Aude, Tarn, Tarn-et-Garonne and Gers, will each provide an elite battalion, 
so that there will be in all twelve elite battalions which, at 900 men, will make a mass of 10,800 men 
who will always have 9,000 men under arms, the departments to be charged with keeping them in full. 

The two elite battalions of the Pyrénées-Orientales will be placed at Mont-Louis and in front of 
Perpignan; the two of Ariége, two of the Haute-Garonne, four of the four departments of the second line, 
total eight, will be under the direct orders of the senator, in Foix, and will be responsible for the defense 
of Ariége and valley of Aran; the two battalions of the Hautes-Pyrenees will be placed at Venasque, in 
the valley of Aran, and on all other neighboring points. There will be on this frontier 6,000 men, 
national guards, armed, 10,000 elite, in all 16,000, only in charge of the defense of the borders. 

The third way is to preserve mountain hunter battalions, made up of refractory conscripts, and so 
on. You must have state of training and know if they are recruited by the National Guard or conscripts. 

These measures will protect these borders from devastation; we will not have to groan over the 
consequences of the irruptions of the Spanish bands. 

You can tell Senator Rampon that I chose him; and even if Councilor Pelet is still in these 
countries, he could remain there until the end of the final organization, in which he would help Senator 
Rampon. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.” : 





Page 56 


18310. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 6, 1811. 


I refer you the pieces of the correspondence of Catalonia. I can not rule on the army without 
having under the eyes of states of situation. Send me those from the nearest situation, December Ist or at 
least November 15th. The losses of the army of Catalonia come from the stubbornness that one has put 
to stay in Figuiéres. I have repeatedly recommended leaving Ampurdan, a country as unhealthy as 
Walcheren Island. This obstinacy will destroy the whole army. When the siege of Figuieres obliged us 
to employ many forces on this point, the presence of the army might be necessary; but, immediately 
after taking the fort, it was necessary to push forward and leave the Empordan, which has always been 
fatal to the French. 

A million has been sent to update the pay. I am waiting for the result of the convoy that General 
Decaen leads to Barcelona. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18311. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNTY, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 6, 1811 


Count Decres, it follows from my various information that I have in France sixteen million trees 
having 5 feet of turn, or 480 million cubic feet, or enough to make four thousand eight hundred vessels. 

Thus, with a single order, I can, by the month of February, cut off throughout my empire a 
quantity of wood sufficient to make four thousand eight hundred vessels, and that without detriment to 
my forests; for only trees of one hundred and fifty to two hundred years would be cut, and from that 
moment on, this cut would do no harm to ordinary hammering. If we wanted to take trees 3 feet in 
circumference, as the navy employs today, I could make 2400 more ships, so that I would have enough 
to build seven thousand two hundred ships. And finally, if one wanted to use the woods which the Dutch 
use in constructions, having less than 3 feet of circumference, I would have an infinite quantity. 

The countries located on the Saone, on the Doubs, on the Rhone, on the Canal du Languedoc, on 
the Isére, the Mediterranean coast, which”° 





Page 57 


can feed the port of Toulon, are included, in the calculation that I have just established, for a third. In a 
year, then, I could have enough wood in Toulon to make two thousand ships. 

In deducting from these calculations what we wish for the forests too far from the rivers, and 
where we could however hammer curves and some precious woods, if we did not take ordinary woods, 
it always results that there is in France an immense quantity of wood, and that it must arrive at Toulon a 
quantity such that one can build there as many vessels as one can desire it. 

The forests that can provide the Antwerp yards are those of the Rhine, Moselle, Meurthe, Meuse, 
Scheldt, etc., to which we can join those of the Aisne, part of forest conservation from the Seine and the 
Aube, since, by the channel of Saint-Quentin, all this can go to Antwerp. 

I have a precise job on the Compiégne forest; it follows that, if I wanted to cut down all the trees 
proper to the constructions, having 5 feet in circumference, I would have enough to make twenty ships, 
or more than two million cubic feet of wood; that by cutting the trees of 3 feet in circumference, I would 
have enough to make forty ships. This is positive: all trees are counted and calculations done. This work 
is done in the greatest detail; there is nothing to fall back on. These two million cubic feet of wood 
would be delivered to the navy on the banks of the Aisne and Oise. Now the forest of Compiegne, which 
can supply wood for the construction of forty vessels, is nothing, since it has only 30,000 acres, I expect 
the same work on the forest of Fontainebleau and other forests of the Crown, where I am guaranteed 
such a satisfactory result. 

These glimpses are the results of observations made for several years in the forests of the 
Domaine and those of the communes. 

It is another simple and equally satisfying overview. The navy pounds about two million cubic 
feet of wood a year; there is no difficulty in hammering in the reserved wood of the cuts sold in the 
years 1810, 1809, 1808, 1807 and 1806, which is five years. That would give her ten million cubic feet 
of wood that could be hammered in the year and in the same places where she made her hammering. 
Now these ten million cubic feet would provide for the construction of a hundred ships of war, with 
precautions the cutting of the woods of the reserve can be done in all copses; but in the copses of four 
years it can be done without inconvenience. 

Result. - It follows from what has just been established that make extraordinary cut line of two 
million cubic feet of wood’ 


57 





Page 58 


in the basin of Toulon and the Mediterranean, and that it is necessary to make a line of three millions for 
the shipyards of the Scheldt and Holland; that these cuts will cost the navy nothing more than to 
transport them to its ports; that this extraordinary cut can be made within the limits nearest the rivers and 
ports, and where the farms are cheaper; that, consequently, the markets made in Holland with wood 
merchants may be reduced, and that this quantity of wood may be at 40 or 50 sols per cubic foot; that 
the yard of Antwerp, that of Amsterdam, and that of Rotterdam, may be supplied with power, and that 
that of Toulon may be considerably increased, so that we shall immediately have an extraordinary 
means of producing wood which It is possible to cut this year and have, in the ports of Toulon and 
Antwerp, in sufficient quantity to build fifty vessels; that some of what was directed to Le Havre may be 
sent back to Antwerp by means of the Saint-Quentin canal; that, far from asking for timber from 
Germany, Prussia, and other countries, we have more than enough in France. 

As for Brest, I have no sufficient information, given the circumstances of the transport. I will 
only have this information in a few days. But, by reasoning in the same way, we will have enough to 
build five or six warships, which will give a little activity to these yards. 

The wood being almost useless in Nantes, we can reduce the cuts and let the forests rest, which 
we will find at peace. 

It is all the more necessary that measures be taken, that the cuts of the administration will be 
hardly two thirds of those of the preceding years; consequently, the Dutch lumber merchants, who will 
be informed of this, will sell me the more expensive wood, and I shall have a smaller quantity. 

Report to me on these important issues. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18312. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL, OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 6, 1811. 


Cousin, I send you the correspondence of Spain; make a statement of the distinctions and 


rewards requested, my intention being to grant them. 
Write to the Duke of Ragusa that, in case the movements of 8 


58 





Page 59 


the enemy would force him to march north, he would have command over General Dorsenne; but the 
big deal at this moment is the taking of Valencia. 

Testify to the Duke of Dalmatia my discontent with General Girard's flank march in front of the 
enemy, a march of three days, and all the more badly combined, as the enemy always had the power to 
cut him off; it had to be supported by a strong detachment. It is unfortunate that, with an army of 80,000 
men, no arrangements were made for prudence to avoid receiving an affront from a small corps of 6,000 
Englishmen. Tell him that I remain in my opinion, that whenever a battle is fought, especially to the 
English, we must not divide, we must join forces, present imposing masses: all the troops left in the back 
run the risk of being beaten in detail or forced to abandon the posts. Reiterate the order to supply 
Badajoz for one year. If the capture of the island of Leon is considered impossible, it is necessary to act 
vigorously on Murcia, in order to relieve the army of Valencia. Tell him I made a decree for the race. I 
do not intend to do it at my expense; that will throw me into immense and ridiculous expense. Write to 
him that he can organize his army as he thinks fit in six or seven divisions, while preserving the 
generals, each according to his grade and rank. 

I grant the Duke de Bellune permission to return to France; but, as it may happen that the Duke 
of Bellune is engaged in some operation in which his presence is still necessary, you will send this 
permission to the Duke of Dalmatia, who will deliver it to the Duke of Bellune in due time. 

The Duke of Dalmatia has the finest army in the world, and yet he does not hold in check either 
General Hill or the army of Murcia, which has all marched to the aid of Valencia. 

You will report to the Minister of the Treasury the 500,000 francs which were found less in the 
convoy that General Avice led to the Army of the South. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18313 ,.- TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 9, 1811. 


There is a green cloth for the Pupilles regiment for two battalions. This sheet will be kept and 
intended to dress two battalions, or” 


59 





Page 60 


1,600 Pupil of more than seventeen, strong and vigorous, whom I intend to form, in the course of 
January, of what is greatest in the battalions, and which we will be able to use as a result of the army. 
These growing men will need to be dressed; then they will leave their white clothes to the corps; 
we will send green cloth and dress them on their size. The green cloth must be used in order to leave the 
white to the Dutch grenadier regiments. 
According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18314. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 9, 1811. 


Count Decres, let me know what it would cost a cubic foot of wood taken in one of the streets 
of the forest of Compiegne, as is customary, and transported to the river Oise, and from there, by the 
Aisne, to the quays of Antwerp. 

Make me the same calculation on the price of a cubic foot of wood taken at Fontainebleau, and 
take the Seine, the Oise, and the Canal de Saint-Quentin to Antwerp. 

Make the same reasoning by assuming the wood taken at Saint-Germain. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18315. - TOMARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 9, 1811. 


Cousin, I receive your letter on the arrangements to be made in case circumstances require it. I 
reserve to answer in more detail; but I see that already you do not have enough cavalry. It is therefore 
proper that you give orders to the brigade composed of the 23rd and 24th regiments of chasseurs, 
commanded by General Castex, to go to the Elbe, in the place most abundant in fodder. I have the 
Minister of War order the brigade to be at your disposal. Make her move by the road where she can give 
the least shading. This brigade will bring the number of your light cavalry regiments to ten; which, with 
your eight regiments of cuirassiers, will make you eighteen regiments of cavalry. I will have the 23rd 
and 24th of 


60 


Page 61 


Miinster, in the course of January, by another brigade of cavalry. I suppose that you have reiterated to 
your cavalry regiments the order to bring men from their depots, so that all the horses are mounted and 
that when walking there is no if or no. Make General Bruyere responsible for the light cavalry, the 
generals Saint-Germain and Doumerc for the cuirassiers, if, twenty-four hours after having received the 
order, they are not in a condition to enter the campaign with all their horses . I appointed General 
Doumerc Major General, and I gave him the command of the Cuirassier Division which is at Erfurt. I 
suppose that these regiments have their rifles and their cartridges within range, their forges in the 
country, and that you have ordered them to have a certain quantity of irons, to be able to make great 
marches without stopping. that in the event of an event you can use your 8th and 9th division, The 8th is 
already meeting in Miinster; the 9th will be in the course of January, 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18316, - TO JEHOME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
At CASSEL, 
Paris, December 3, 1811 (1) 


Brother, I have learned with difficulty the accident that happened to you (2). He is very happy that 
neither you nor the queen have experienced any misfortune. 
NAPOLEON. 


December 9, 1811. 
P. S. Make known to me the state of your troops on the Ist of December, infantry, cavalry, 
artillery; how many divisions you can train and how they would be commanded; all this secretly. Tell 
me about your artillery, transport boxes and engineering tools. How many men would you need to 
occupy Silesia? How many do you have of 1807? What are the places to take? 
From the original comm. by S. A. I. Prince Jerome. 





1) This letter, written in Paris on December 3rd, 1811, is followed by a P. S. of the 9th; or thought it necessary to 
place it on the date of the expedition. This Father is entirely in the hands of the Emperor. 
2) A violent fire had almost completely destroyed the royal castle of Cassel.°! 


61 


Page 62 


18317. - DECREE. 
Tuileries Palace. December 9, 1811. 


THE ABOLITION OF THE FEDERAL REGIME. 


ARTICLE 1. The feudal regime is abolished in the departments of Ems-Superior, Bouches-du- 
Weser and Bouches-de-l'Elbe. 


GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE ABOLITION OF THE FEDERAL REGIME. 


ART. 2. All honorary distinctions, superiority or power, resulting from the feudal system, are 
abolished, without prejudice to the provisions of the decree of 26th August, 1811. 

ART. 3. The seigniorial courts are likewise abolished. Consequently, all the external signs of 
seigneurial justice will be slaughtered within two months of the publication of this decree. Failure of the 
lords to have done so within this period, the destruction will be at the diligence of the prosecutor at the 
court of first instance and the mayor, at the expense of the municipality, which will benefit from the 
materials. 

ART. 4. The law recognizes only allodial property. As a consequence, all the fiefs situated in the 
extent of the three departments, whatever their nature and denomination, or that they were formerly 
foreign sovereigns, or that the direct domain (Lehenherrschaft, Lehenherrlichkeits belongs to private 
individuals ( Lehenherrn), whether they are immediate fiefdoms or fiefs, are converted into free-wills 
and freed from all duty and subjection resulting from the feudal bond, so that the possessors may freely 
alienate or mortgage them. 

ART. 5. Similarly, the rights of feudal inheritance, of whatever nature, are abolished. 
Nevertheless the feudal succession will take place one last time in favor of the successors existing at the 
time of the publication of the Westphalian law of March 28, 1809 for the countries formerly 
Westphalian, and for the other countries forming part of the three departments at the time of the 
publication of our present decree. 

ART. 6. In the case where, at the opening of the succession, the person who was called upon to 
collect it feudal at the time of the publication of the law of March 28, 1809 - or at that of the publication 
of the present Decree, according to the distinction made in the preceding article, would have been no 
longer called upon, the feudal system subsisting, or would have been so only for a certain portion, the 
succession will be regulated allodially,” 


62 


Page 63 


either for the whole) or for the portion in relation to which his vocation has ceased. 
ART. 7. The seigneurial and feudal rights are suppressed without indemnity or preserved until 
the repurchase, according to the distinctions established hereafter. 


SEIGNURAL AND FEDERAL RIGHTS ABOLISHED. 


ART. 8. All serfdom is abolished without compensation. 

ART. 9. Are deemed acts of serfdom: 

1“ The right to compel the settler and his children to serve the master as servants (Gesinde- 
Zwangrechts); 

2"! The rights of the master over the education of the children of the settler, the obligation to 
remain attached to such profession or soil; 

3 The obligation to ask the lord's consent to marry) and the rights he could demand regarding 
the marriage (Bedingung, Broutkauf, Klauenthaler, etc.); 

4" The rights which were paid to the seignior in order to be able to build factories, to exercise 
professions, or to perform acts which must be free to everybody; 

5" The oath of fidelity or submission to lend to the master; 

6"" The incapacity to acquire in all property, to dispose of, to dispose of between life or by an act 
of last will, to act and defend in judgment; 

7" The right to a portion of the movable inheritance of the colonist or his wife, called mortuary 
right (Sterbfall, Betthaupt); 

8" The usufruct of the property of the vassals, tenants or censuses during their minority. 

ART. 10. The right of lords to appropriate the inheritance of aliens, bastards, dead persons 
without heirs, vacant property, movable and immovable property, vacant and vacant land, heathland, the 
shipwrecked effects, without prejudice to the rights acquired by the lords who have already made an act 
of property, as well as the property and customary rights which the lords, the communes or the private 
individuals may have, by virtue of titles independent of the seigniorial justice . 

ART. 11. The feudal withdrawal, and generally all right under which a lord was subrogated to 
the purchaser, is abolished without indemnity. 

ART. 12. Are also removed without compensation: 

The rights levied on the persons, by reason of the residence, the number of the cattle or to any 
other liter which would hold only at the® 


63 


Page 64 


protection and not to a grant of funds owned or in use; 

Rights in furniture sales; 

Weighing, measuring, inspection, display, warehouse, transportation of goods and merchandise. 

However, the buildings and halls will continue to belong to the heretofore lords who currently 
own them, except to the municipality to buy them or rent them, and, if it does not, to require a tariff of 
the entry fees , warehouse or stay of commodities and goods. The difficulties that might arise in this 
respect will be brought before the prefecture councils, except recourse to our Council of State. 

ART. 13. Are canceled without compensation: 

Tolls, tolls and the like, except discharge for the lords of the obligations to which they were 
subject by reason of these rights. 

Are excepted, as for now, those rights that have been granted to the lords, either for the cost of 
construction of bridges, canals and other works built under this condition, or for compensation of 
buildings and any establishments removed for public purposes. 

The rights excepted by the present article will provisionally continue to be perceived, according 
to the titles and the tariff of their primitive creation, recognized and checked by the prefects of the places 
where they perceive themselves, until, according to their opinion and on the report of our minister of the 
interior, he has been decided by us in this respect; for this purpose, the heretofore lords, possessors of 
these rights, will be required, within one year from the publication of this decree, to represent their titles 
to the prefects; otherwise, the perceptions will remain suspended. 

ART. 14. Are similarly suppressed: 

The exclusive rights of fishing in non-navigable or floating rivers, and hunting rights, which are 
reserved for the owners, each on his own land, except to comply with the laws and regulations of the 
police; 

The rights on public roads, streets and squares, and on the trees planted there, without prejudice, 
for the lords as well as the riparian proprietors, the ownership of the existing trees and by them planted 
except the right, or owners residents, or municipalities, to buy back, according to expert estimates, the 
trees belonging to the lord, for which he must™ 


64 


Page 65 


give notice, two months in advance, of the felling and sale of the said trees, 

ART. 15. The right of the seigneurs to appropriate all or part of the property of the communes, 
and the royalties which they received for the vain grazing, are abolished without indemnity. 

If the seigneurs prove to have conceded funds in property or uses, the fund granted or the right of 
use will continue to be subject to the fee originally stipulated. 

ART. 16. Are still removed without compensation: 

All rights of banality, together with the ancillary and royalties paid as a subscription. 

Are excepted banalities established for the benefit of individuals not lords, and those attributed to 
the lords by virtue of an agreement by which the lord will have made the commune any advantage other 
than that of keeping in good condition mills, ovens and other banal objects. 

ART. 17. Are also deleted without compensation: 

The personal chores imposed by the only reason that the people were vassals one lived some 
localities (Persamalfrohnen); 

All other chores, even real ones, for which it would not be proved, by titles in good form, that 
they come from a grant of funds or real right; 

Chores, even real and supported by titles, if indefinite, failing the conditions prescribed by 
Article 20. 

ART. 18. Are not included in the provision of the preceding article the municipal chores 
(Commufiohnen, Gemeindefrohnen) due for the service of the communes, and the public chores 
(Burgherren, Landesfrohnen, Landfolge) due for the service of the State, until it was otherwise provided 
for, as well as the huntings imposed on communes or individuals for the destruction of evil animals. 

ART. 19, are deemed to be indeterminate (ungemessene Dienste) the chores for which one of the 
following three things is not determined by the title of concession or for the recognitions passed to the 
burrows, namely: 1‘ the amount of work: 2™ the number of days; 3" the extent of the funds for whose 
exploitation the drudgery is due; this will apply to any obligation to work and to carry, even in fact of 
construction. 

a the number of days is determined, but the type of work is not, even by use, the workers can not 
refuse 


65 


Page 66 


to use these days in the work that will be required of them, provided that it relates to the cultivation or 
the exploitation of the lands. 

In the event of a dispute about the type of work requested, it will be decided by the justice of the 
peace, except the appeal. 

ART. 20. The employee, employed for a public service, on the day he must work for the former 
master, is not obliged to be replaced or to return another day, unless the public service is required. from 
him because of other goods than those subject to. the particular chore. 

ART. 21. If chores exist only for the needs of the owner's property, they can not be leased or sold 
without such property; but, if it is permitted to use it otherwise than for the cultivation and exploitation 
of the said goods, they may be leased and sold, provided that the condition of the commodities does not 
become harsher. 

ART. 22. The existing chores can not be increased. It is forbidden to establish new ones, even for 
the grant of funds. 

ART. 23. The above-mentioned abolition also includes the right to compel settlers by corporal or 
pecuniary punishment, without recourse to justice, to fulfill non-suppressed obligations (Dienstzwang), 
and all such rights. 

ART. 24. The persons liable for the canceled rights may not claim those they have already paid. 

It will be the same for lords with regard to the rights that would still be due. 

ART. 25. When the owners of the rights preserved by the articles 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 
above will not be able to represent the primitive title, they will be able to supplement it by two 
compliant, enunciative recognitions. an older one not contradicted by previous recognitions, given by 
the community of the inhabitants, if it concerns the general rights; or by interested individuals, if they 
concern particular rights; provided that they are supported by a present possession, which dates back to 
the forty-year period, from the Westphalian law of March 28, 1809, for the Westphalian countries, and, 
in the other parts of the three departments, to run of the publication of this decree, and that they recall 
either the conventions or the concessions described in the aforementioned articles. 

ART. 26. When there is a reason for the same inheritance of several titles or recognitions, the 
least expensive to the keeper will be 





66 


Page 67 


preferred, without regard to the more or less seniority of their dates; except for the action in blame or 
alteration, on the part of the aforesaid lord, against those of the said recognitions, which will not be 
guaranteed by the prescription, when he has not been a party in person or by a Power of Attorney. 

ART. 27. Those who have acquired private rights abolished without compensation may not 
demand any restitution of prices or damages; those who would have acquired the domain of the State 
will have the right only to the restitution either of the finances by them advanced, or of the other objects 
or goods ceded to them the State. 

ART. 28. It shall be free to farmers who have leased none of the same rights, without a mixture 
of other property or retained rights, to surrender their leases; and, in this case, they can not claim any 
other indemnity than the restitution of the bribes and the discharge of the rents or rents, in proportion to 
the non-enjoyment caused by the suppression of these rights. Those who have leased any rights 
abolished jointly with other property or with redeemable rights may only claim a reduction in their 
bribes and rentings, proportionate to the amount of the objects removed. 

Nevertheless, if this proportion, fixed according to the estimates made as it will be said in Title 
II, Chapter 11, forms at least one-tenth of the annual rent, the farmer will be free to terminate the lease. 

ART. 29. The lessees of any abolished rights may, according to the distinctions of the preceding 
article, request a discharge or a proportional reduction in respect of the royalties they are charged with, 
but they may not claim anything on the moneys of entry. 

(Following are the enumeration of the rights to be abolished for redemption, and provisions 
concerning redeemable seigneurial rights, the repurchase of the royalties and benefits, the usufruct and 
the property of the colonats.) 

Excerpt from the Moniteur of December 17, 1811 


18318. - TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, December 10, 1811. 


Monsieur le Duke de Bassano, I send you for you alone a letter from the King of Westphalia, 


which you will send me back. Pull out the substance, not in the form of a letter from the King, but as an 
excerpt from a communication from the court of Cassel. You will send this excerpt” 


67 


Page 68 


to my minister at Cassel, and you will charge him to have conferences with the King's ministers, to 
know the facts, which has given rise to this opinion, which appears to be that of the King, and finally 
what is the remedy; if the troops are not safe; to whom is the fault? The King raises too many troops, 
makes too much expense and changes his principle of administration too often. My minister will have 
the facts verified at Magdeburg, Hanover; France does not draw anything from these countries. You will 
recommend him to hold serious conferences with the King's ministers, to establish his opinion on these 
different questions, and to make it known to you. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18319. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 10, 1811. 


There are many complaints about the engineer of the roads and bridges of the department of Var. 
The gorges of Ollioules are impassable; the road from Grasse to Draguignan is in the worst condition, as 
well as from Grasse to Cannes. This engineer is accused not only of negligence, but also of protecting 
suspicious entrepreneurs. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18320. - TO MARSECHAL DAVUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 10, 1811. 


Cousin, as a great quantity of troops will be in the kingdom of Westphalia, it is necessary to 
regulate with the minister of the war of Westphalia what is relative to these troops. The King must pay 
and feed 12,500 men. It is right that the expense of all that he will feed in addition be taken in 
compensation on the pay and the clothing of this excess. It is just as well that the other expenses should 
be settled on a reasonable footing, as, for example, 20 sous per ration of fodder, 20 sous per day of 
hospital for the men who will be at the hospitals of the country; the ration of bread and wine at a price a 
little less than the ordinary price, since the soldier is lodged with the inhabitant, and this money remains 
in the country, address to my minister in Cassel for this purpose. Let him know that, this compensation 
being fair, he takes care of the resolution® 


68 


Page 69 


for the year 1811. You will follow this affair by the means of my minister, and the result will be a little 
military convention; it will be pleasant at the court of Westphalia and will smooth out any difficulty. I 
have deliberately desired you to bear this sweetness, so that it brings you closer to the court of 
Westphalia, because the disunion is good for nothing. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18321. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 12, 1811. 


I receive your report of the 9th, with the report of the director of artillery at La Rochelle, whence 
it follows that, on the 9th, my decree on the batteries of the Gironde and the Oleron Island was not 
executed, I see many if, but, because in your report, but no guns or batteries. My decree said positively 
the day when all this was to be executed, It was at the artillery office to take steps to succeed. It's not 
taking action to write to a poor manager to do. What do you want him to do. Were you missing cannons? 
You should have told me that; I would have ordered the navy to provide you with it. Were you missing 
wood for the platforms? You should have told me that; I would rather suspend the constructions in the 
yards to provide you the wood that Mait necessary. Were you missing transport buildings? It had to be 
said; I would have ordered that all possible means of transport and even the boats of the ships be made 
available to you. Were you lacking men and officers, and were you unable to have any? It had to be said, 
and I would have ordered twenty officers and a battalion of the Navy of Rochefort to go to Oleron to 
help you, But I see that the artillery office is content to present you with letters to sign for General 
Camas and the director of artillery, Did you commission the genie to build these batteries, and could not 
the genius afford to do so? Was he lacking workers? It was necessary to take the workers of the island of 
Aix. Finally, where the decree was possible or impossible: if it was impossible, you had to say it; if it 
were possible, you had to execute it. Certainly the execution of these orders was not possible: without 
taking any measure that comes out of ordinary forms. I am sending you your report. Get the artillery 
officers and the® 





69 


Page 70 


engineering, and take steps to end it. Already two of my frigates are stuck in Maumusson. Vessels would 
have been for two months to the Saumonards, if the batteries were armed. All my maritime operations 
are stopped. If General Riboisiére had only written letters, he would not have yet armed a single battery 
in the Hyeres Islands, 

From the minute, Archive of the Empire. 


18322. -NOTE 
ON A REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF THE MARINE, RELATING TO TRIESTE. 
Paris, lst December, 1811. 


There is no question of fortifying Trieste; Trieste is so far from England, that an expedition, 
having disembarkation troops on board, can not be made of London to torch a vessel; a cruise of two or 
three ships, carrying 5 or 600 men, can not be strong enough to repel the garrison of Trieste; it would be 
only in case of war with Austria, where the army of Italy would be defeated, and the Austrians masters 
of this place; but the Austrians would not be interested in burning a ship. This hypothesis, moreover, is 
very remote; but that is enough not to make a great work in Trieste, and it is not enough so as not to risk 
the construction of a ship and a frigate. For a frigate, there is no big expense beforehand; the minister 
will order that a frigate be placed on the site. It will be decided, at the formation of the budget of 1812, 
whether it is advisable to build vessels. 

I had the desire to have ships everywhere, because I thought I lacked wood in France; but today 
that I have other ideas and I am convinced that we can build in Toulon, Cherbourg, Rochefort, Antwerp, 
Genoa, as much as we want, it seems to me that it becomes less urgent to take advantage of the woods of 
remote localities to disseminate our workshops. 

According to the copy, Naval Archives, 


18323, - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS, 
Paris. December 13, 1811. 


Count Decres, I received the letter you wrote to me on the 11th; I do not adhere to its content. 
I'm doing too much” 


70 


Page 71 


of your services to grant you the request you make me. Stay at the station where Providence and my will 
have called you; you have health to serve me another ten years. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18324. TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 13, 1811. 


Count Decres, I send you the report that the forest administration gives me. There is a draft 
decree that I ask you to draft definitively, after having discussed it at the Naval Council, where you can 
call the State Councilor Bergon and the other foresters, if necessary, to give you information. You will 
present me a project to determine the constituency of the basins that must supply the various ports. The 
circumstance of the canal of Saint-Quentin makes me wish that a portion of the woods of the basin of 
the Oise, the Aisne and the Seine be directed on Antwerp. Toulon my needs are such that the 
constituency of its basin is such that the Canal du Center, the Saone and the Languedoc Canal can 
conduct wood there. In handing me over this work, I want you to show me the state of hammering by 
department, as it has been done for the last three years. 

I suppose that hammering annually gives the navy 1,500,000 cubic feet of wood, namely: one 
million from the forests of the Estate, and the rest from individuals. I believe that supplies by purchases 
that do not come from hammering amount to 5 or 600,000 cubic feet, which depends on the 
circumstances and years: These purchases, which are very expensive, can now no longer instead, since I 
will have my own woods. So I only count on the hammering of 1,500,000 cubic feet per year. It may 
even be reduced for points where large supplies of wood are not needed. For example, why pile up so 
much wood in Le Havre, especially in Bayonne and Nantes? It will be more appropriate to only make 
cuts proportionate to the constructions that one wants to undertake, and to leave the woods on foot to 
exploit them at the time of the peace, where their transport to Brest will be easier. This is only an idea to 
be deepened. 1,500,000 cubic feet per year is about what”! 





71 


Page 72 


to make fifteen ships; it's barely half of what we need, because wing repairs, consumption in small 
buildings, and so on. , must increase consumption to nearly 4 million cubic feet. I have therefore decided 
to make for 1812, 1813, 1814 and 1815 an extraordinary cut of 8 million cubic feet of wood; which, 
added to the 6 million from ordinary hammering during these four years, will make me 14 million cubic 
feet. By deducting 3 millions for the repair of the squadrons and the ships at sea and for the other 
consumptions of wood during these four years, that is to say 750,000 a year, there would be enough to 
make a hundred ships in four years, that is twenty-five a year. 

In the Rhine, Meuse, and Seine Basin, my intention is to cut four million cubic feet of 
extraordinary water during these four years, which would go to Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Antwerp, 
independently of ordinary hammering; this cup would be made by equal parts in 1812, 1813, 1814 and 
1815. 

In the Toulon Basin, during these four years, my intention is to make an extraordinary cut of 2 
million cubic feet, at the rate of 500,000 cubic feet per year; which will provide enough to build five 
ships per garlic, regardless of ordinary cuts. In Brest, my intention would be to have a million cubic feet 
arrive, regardless of ordinary cuts, or 250,000 a year. At Cherbourg, Lorient and Rochefort, I wish to 
employ a million cubic feet in these four years. This quantity will be distributed among these ports and 
exploited in the nearest forests at the rate of 250,000 cubic feet per year. These holdings will yield 2 
million cubic feet per year, and in the four years, 8 million, which, together with 6 million cubic feet, 
will total 14 million cubic feet. 

Extraordinary commissions will be appointed to make these hammering, by determining the 
nature of the woods and the place where they will be taken. They will be chosen as close to the rivers as 
possible, so that transportation is easier and cheaper. 

According to these dispositions, my buildings will be Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Antwerp, 
according to what I have already ordered; at Brest, five vessels will be put on the site, so that it can be 
launched there two times a year; in Toulon, eight ships will be placed on the shipyards so that four can 
be launched in the year, regardless of the frigates of the Mediterranean. The same work would be done 
for the Genoa River, Tuscany and”? 


72 


Page 73 


Rome, which form the basin of Genoa. As soon as the holds of this port are built in the dock, two ships 
will be put on the sites, so as to launch at least one each year. 

It is a question I want the Marine Council to retreat, namely, whether we can build ships of the 
line in the Loire. The tests of the camels that have been made in Venice confirm me again in the opinion 
that I have always been that vessels of 80 could be built in the Loire. I wish this question to be examined 
thoroughly, and that all the observations made by the commissioners whom I have sent to the spot be put 
before my eyes. Finally, if, as I think, ships can be built in the Loire, six vessels will be built there, so 
that three ships will be launched every year. If the constructions on the Loire become possible, one 
could then increase by 500,000 cubic feet a year the extraordinary exploitation for this basin. I hope that, 
in the course of next week, you will report to me on this object, on Nantes and on Genoa. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18325. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 13, 1811. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I reply to your contribution of the 27th November concerning the 
supply of Danzig. From January 1, 1812, the service will be entirely taken in my account, disgrace 
housing and barracks, military beds, woods and lights, and any rent of ovens and shops. This expense 
must be regulated so that it does not exceed 500,000 francs a month. Prussian regulations are also 
required, which tax commodities for exact payment. The bread must be very cheap, since wheat has no 
value in Gdansk. It is necessary to put as much order as possible in these provisions: the day of hospitals 
must not exceed 20 sous. As for the supply of siege, I have issued a decree which you will receive and 
which regulates everything. Of the 2 million francs which you ask, the sum of one million has already 
been granted to you under the budget of the Danzig Special Fund for 1811; the other million you will be 
similarly granted on the special fund from Danzig for 1812. I have adopted many of your bases; but I 
added the obligation to have flours. I changed” 





13 


Page 74 


the article of the woods, which seems ridiculous to me; however, I left it for a small amount. I removed 
the biscuit and hay items, but I doubled the oats; with oats and bran, the horses will be able to live; 
besides, there will always be time to take all the hay from the island of Nogat, there are some for 
immense supplies. 

You will see in my decree that I brought under the title of reserve stores 50,000 quintals metric 
wheat wheat and 50,000 quintals of rye, making a total of 100,000 quintals metric, which General Rapp 
must obtain in the first moments of the siege putting your hand on such a quantity, which will easily be 
found in the shops of the city; lastly, I have also carried for these reserve magazines 2,000 metric 
quintals of vegetables, which General Rapp will obtain on the island of Nogat, and 2,000 quintals of 
rice, for which I have made a fund of 120,000 francs. 

NAPOLEON. 

PS For the extraordinary supply of 3 million bottles of wine and 500,000 pints of brandy from 
France, you will make a special report on the means of obtaining in Danzig this resource for the army, 
either by bringing these quantities of Bordeaux and Charente by English licenses, or by transporting 
them during the winter by Lubeck and the Baltic. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18326. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 14, 1811. 


The engineering equipment of the Grand Army consists of the 1st company of the train which is 
at present at Hamburg, the 5th at Melz, and the 6th at Bayonne; which will make 4 to 500 men, 150 
wagons and 7 to 800 horses; it also consists of caissons attached to the various sapper and miners’ 
companies, which should be at least the object of about fifty wagons, so there would be at least 200 cars 
for engineering equipment. The three companies have 3 boxes of miners, 8 wagons of pétards, 3 bells, 8 
pods and wagons loaded with ropes, anchors, cramps and other objects necessary for the repair of 
bridges; I 


74 


Page 75 


do not talk about 21,000 hitched tools. That being said, the engineering park seems to me to have 
enough, and there is no need to organize a special crew for the bridges, except for all that pertains to the 
naval battalion. It would therefore be six boxes loaded with the necessary arts tools for the battalions. 
Since we have 3 bells with the three companies, what need is there to have 4 new ones? Since we have 
21 cars loaded with ropes, fifth wheels and tackle for the bridges, why add 4 trolleys? Since we have 6 
cars loaded with nacelles with the companies, why add 4 trolleys? 

In general, the bridge crew proposed by the engineers seems to me useless; the crews are 
sufficient, but I do not oppose the formation of half a company with the depot at Metz, and that this 
company should be in charge of serving six caissons with the necessary tools for the battalion of the 
navy and 4 cars carrying 2 large bells which will be assigned to the service of the navy. 

Give me a report which will show me what kind of bell the three companies are charged with, 
and finally, what other kind of bell do you want to load the two cars that follow the naval workers? 

A general state of the equipment which will exist to the German army will make me better 
acquainted with the situation of things, and will enable me to take a definite course. It is necessary to 
add the portion of material which I ordered the deposit to Danzig, pioneering tools, etc. It would be good 
to have some big bells and a supply of iron-trimmed pines that can be used to build a bridge on stilts, 
either on the Vistula or on the Niemen. The transport is fled by water and in an extremely easy way in 
all these countries. 

It would be at least very important to have at Danzig either the irons necessary to put at the end 
pilots, or keys, nails, and what would be necessary for a large bridge on stilts; so that having them in 
store at Danzig could be transported where it would be useful. 

It is necessary that there be in Danzig a supply of tools for the miners and the workmen of the 
marine, and for the replacements, if it were to be lost. Danzig must be the great place of deposit. 
Everything must be there, and we must have nothing to ask in France. 

Make me a general report on the engineering equipment of the Great Army. So the engineering 
material will consist in the caissons”” 


75 


Page 76 


miners, sappers, in the 150 caissons of the three companies, in a supply of pioneering tools, in a supply 
of pilots all fashioned, in a supply of planks sufficient to build a bridge on stilts on the Vistula, in all the 
irons necessary to build another bridge on stilts, in ropes, nacelles and spares of every kind, tools of art 
and other objects necessary to the engineers, which will exist in deposit in the place of Danzig. 

It is necessary to draw up the state of the loads of the engineers. We must not forget torches, 
lanterns for the night, in good quantity, to enlighten the workers. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18327. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS 
Paris, December 14, 1811. 


I read carefully your work on deck crews, December 12. 

It is proposed to increase by 600 horses the command of the battalions of the train for the horses 
necessary to the 7th, If you sell to the kingdom of Italy the 600 horses of the 7th principal, the kingdom 
of Italy will pay them you; and then I will put an approved one at the disposal of these horses, and the 
money coming from it will be used for the purchase of the 600 horses which miss you. I will not sign the 
decree you presented to me. The necessary funds will be given to you on the January service; if you 
have a pressing need, the Minister of the Treasury will give you advance notice of what will be given to 
you in January, 

You did not understand my intentions on the Guard Reserve. I did not claim that the Guard 
advanced the money necessary for the purchase of the horses of the 4th and 7th principal, but that the 
horses which must be bought for the 7th and 4th principal, which must be used with the Guard, would be 
bought and received by General Sorbier, who has an interest in buying good horses, since these 
battalions must serve with the Guard. It is also an effect of my confidence in this general. It will 
therefore be necessary for the 7th principal to come to la Fere, where he will receive his horses; the 
fourth principal can receive them in Metz. 

The cavalry reserve is to be served by the 11th Battalion. I believe that this battalion must set to 
work without delay in order to raise the horses of the four companies at Erfurt and Hanover.’° 





76 


Page 77 


which belong to the artillery of the cavalry reserve and belong to the four battalions destined for the 
observation corps of the Elbe. The depot and the men on foot of this battalion will be able to go to 
Dusseldorf, and the purchases of horses which this battalion must have in the Duchy of Berg will be 
made. 

By this means, the return will be easier, and these horses will all be returned where are the 
regiments of cuirassiers, in Cologne and Bonn. 

It is however necessary that the current couplings that. are in the two divisions of cuirassiers at 
Cologne, and at Bonn, remain there until they are replaced by the horses of the 11th battalion, so that, 
before the reel was made, I ordered the departure of these two divisions, we felt no embarrassment or 
delay. 

You carry to the deck crew one hundred and seventy ammunition carriages; it seems to me that 
this is not the custom. Train me this crew according to the rules. In the deck crew there must be two big 
bells, so necessary to shore up a boat bridge. 

It is necessary that both bridge crews exist in Gdansk. In addition to Danzig, we must have the 
ropes, anchors, irons, and all the articles necessary for a third crew, so that, according to the 
circumstances, I will have the three crews hitched up, or I will have one of them driven by requisitioning 
transports. and the other two by those of the army. You observe very well that there are everywhere 
boats and wood; and with the amount of workmen I lead, it will be promptly established. Thus the 
organization of this third crew will require only the ropes, anchors, irons and three nacelles to pick up 
the boats. Let me know how many wagons will be needed for this crew. 

I am currently coming to detail. The crew is one hundred and seventy boats; you are missing 
five, which you want to take in Strasbourg. Order that these five boats be made in Danzig; I do not want 
to take anything in Strasbourg; and as a hundred and seventy are a short number, have thirty-five new 
ones built in Danzig, which will make two hundred boats. We will have ample both crews. 

Order that instead of six hampers, which are twenty short, be made in Gdansk, so that with the 
ten that exist there will be thirty spare bunches. 

Have fifteen booms, which, with the ten that exist, will make twenty-five” 





77 


Page 78 


You see that my intention is not to draw anything from Strasbourg or Verona; everything must 
be in Danzig. 

You carry a hundred and seventy carts, which seems to me too great; however, put in 
construction in Danzig the number which is necessary, and let me know the difference of the price of a 
carriage built in Strasbourg to that of a carriage built in Danzig. Let me know also, if we can not obtain 
in Danzig the fifteen boxes of tools and the twelve forges which are wanting, and if we could, by March, 
have them built at Gdansk. 

I say the same thing for ropes, nails, anchors, irons, etc., but everything must be done at Danzig 
on the Ist of March. So we have three full months to get what is missing. 

My deck crew will consist of: two large bridges over the Vistula with all the necessary gear and 
objects, in a rope, anchor and horseshoe bridge, and, in addition, four deck guards, one for each corps 
and one to the Guard. 

I suppose the staff officers that you put to the deck crews have already served in the bridges. 

You offer me General Camas to order the bridges: does this officer have any experience in this 
part? 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18328. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 14, 1811. 


I am sending you a report on the quartering of Miinster. As the convents will be removed, there 
will be room. It is necessary that there be lodging for 8,000 men of infantry and 6,000 men of cavalry, a 
beautiful hospital and a great handling. Give the most positive orders to take possession of this barracks 
and provide it with military beds. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18329. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 15, 1811. 


The Duke of Feltre, in Vienna, I had a bridge of one piece cast on an arm of the Danube 100 
fathoms wide.’® 


78 


Page 79 


that in the crews of the bridge I train in Danzig, the artillery officers arrange the pieces so that in an 
hour's time the bridge can be put into the water in one piece. It is proper, for the success of these 
provisions, that the details be stopped here by the artillery officers. It took several days in Vienna for 
this operation, because nothing was prepared; but if the beams, beams, irons were arranged in advance, I 
think we could do it in less than a few hours. It will then remain to be known if this bridge could not be 
thrown also on a river of 200 toises, on the Rhine, for example; Iam worn for the affirmative. I wish 
this question to be discussed by the officers of the artillery, and that the experiment of this process be 
then made on the Rhine; but these trials must be hidden, and foreigners must not be aware of them. It 
would be a great step if, by sheltering an island or a river that leads into the river, a bridge could be 
prepared and then thrown and, by the force of the current, to cut down in six minutes a bridge over a 
large river. I am inclined to think that the tests that we would be doing in Strasbourg would be 
satisfactory. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18330. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 15, 1811. 


The colonel of the 23rd of chasseurs is named since several months. He had not yet joined on 29 
November. Make me a report. This body needs its colonel. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18331. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL, AND OF WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, December 15, 1811. 


My cousin, please report to me the Army of the North. I think I have already ordered my 
grenadiers, a company of artillery on foot, my gendarmerie of elite and the guides of the army to return 
to France; if this order for the elite gendarmerie had not yet been given, give it without delay, and let all 
my gendarmes of the Guard march on Bayonne. I think I ordered the Duke of Ragusa to give a line of 
light artillery company to the general” 





79 


Page 80 


Dorsenne; repeat this order. Let me know which are the companies or detachments of artillery and the 
train which General Dorsenne has, for I wish to recall to France, my two mounted artillery companies, 
the whole train which serves my artillery on horseback. I will not make it difficult to leave the horses 
and harnesses there; but these are the men I wish to return to France. All that remained then was the 
companies of gunner conscripts and the teams necessary for the service of the pieces which are attached 
to the infantry. Let me know if I could not draw Auch, Carcassonne and Bayonne artillery personnel, 
teams and train soldiers to raise those of the Guard. Give me a detailed report on the artillery of the 
Army of the North. I also wish to return to France without delay my hunters, my Poles, and my 
dragoons; but, first, make a contribution to the cavalry of the Army of the North. The lancers of Berg, 
the legion of gendarmerie, the 1st of hussars and the 31“ of chasseurs will remain there, which will make 
four regiments. Let me know what is the strength of these four regiments, including what is in the 
squadrons of war in Spain, what is in the regiments of march, or even what is in their deposit, so that I 
can advise the means to carry them to the highest possible number. As there is more cavalry in the army 
of the south, let me know if, marching regiments of this army, which have not passed Burgos, we could 
not fire enough to carry the cavalry from General Dorsenne to 3,000 men. This question of the cavalry 
of the Army of the North is linked to that of the cavalry of the Army of Portugal; for it is quite evident 
that if I wish General Dorsenne to have more than 3,000 cavalry men, it is because I foresee the case 
where he would have to repel the English army, and then I would like the army to from Portugal and the 
Army of the North could put together 9,000 horses in battle, which would make any movement on the 
part of the English impossible; but I say in battle and not effective, and you know what a huge difference 
that makes. 

Then let me know the situation of the cavalry of the armies of Spain, by uniting all the regiments 
of marches which join. I am waiting for this report to give final orders to the cavalry of my Guard. As 
for the infantry of my Guard, I certainly wish to make her come back too, but I am waiting for the 
capture of Valencia, having, besides, the advantage for the infantry to be able to make her travel to post. 
I also want you to let me know the situation of the Army of Portugal, by bringing together all the 
provisional regiments*” 


80 


Page 81 


which are on its rear and even including what is in Bayonne. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18332. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG, 
Paris. December 15, 1811. 


Cousin, I receive your report on Westphalia, from which it follows that Westphalia owed 
600,000 francs a month and that it spends 735,000. That being so, the King was not wrong to complain. 
I have written to make arrangements to compensate for all this, but the King must provide more than 
600,000 francs, considering the other charges that are not included in the valuation, such as clothing, etc. 
We must also not evaluate the ration of fodder at more than 20 sous. It is very urgent to make this 
convention without delay, so that the king of Westphalia has fixed bases and is satisfied, and if you put a 
few thousand men moreover, it is an advantageous thing in Westphalia, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame Marshal, Princess of Eckmihl. 


18333. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG, 
Paris, December 15, 1811. 


My Cousin, it is necessary that on the 15th of February Modlin be armed, supplied and put in a 
condition to support a siege. Your artillery officers must have the state of the necessary equipment 
made. Forty pieces of 24 at Modlin, for example, are ridiculous. The pieces of 21, are not necessary for 
the defense of a place; we only use this caliber as we have, Le Grand-Duchy has eighteen pieces of 
twenty-four; we can put fifteen in Modlin and bring them to the necessary and existing. There must be at 
least twenty carriages for these fifteen pieces. Seventy-four pieces of twelve are useless, fifty-five are 
enough; they can be taken in Thorn, Praga and Czenstochowa. Thorns and Czenstochowa also have 
mortars to take for Modlin. It must put in this place a lot of powder and balls. I see that there is no 
powder in the Grand Duchy; it is necessary to put at Modlin the greater part of what is at Thorn. You 
must also store supplies in Zamosc.*! 





81 


Page 82 


It seems to me that on the 15th of February we could also place in Modlin a large part of the ammunition 
which is in Warsaw, and even a part of what was placed last year behind the Vistula, since this place can 
defend itself at present. enough time to hold all the deposits. As for the personnel, there are eighteen 
companies of artillery on foot in the Grand-Duchy. Five or six companies may be destined for the 
service of this place. It is therefore appropriate that the February 15 place is in state. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18334, - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IN PARIS, 
Paris, December 16, 1811. 


The Duke of Bassano, M. de Nesselrode will be arriving soon; it brings me to have the senatus- 
consulte returned at once for the lifting of the conscription. I will hold a private council tomorrow to 
have this senatus-consulte returned during the week, and we can not attribute it to the arrival of this 
negotiator. 

With the same intention, I wish that a communication be made to the princes of the 
Confederation on the necessity of remounting their cavalry and preparing their contingent. You will 
write a circular on this subject to my ministers and charge d'affaires, who will discuss with the princes 
and their ministers. They will excuse the lifting of the Russians by 4 men out of 500, the large number of 
troops they have on the frontier, and the party decided where it appears to be in Russia to wage war, My 
charge d'affaires will ask the situation of the troops, the nearest place of the Oder where they can be 
assembled, and how many days in advance it will be necessary for the requisition to be made. 

It is especially to the little princes that it is necessary to give this opinion. We must ask them to 
prepare their contingent to form the 3rd division, 

Nassau has his contingent in Spain, Wiirzburg has had nothing more Spain, so he can supply the 
regiment No. 3, The ducal Saxony can also provide the regiment No. 4, The Lippe, Anhalt, 
Schwarzburg, Reuss and Waldeck can take care of the formation of the 3rd brigade; it is the same with 
the contingent of Prince Primate. 

Give me a report that will show me how these regiments were organized during the Austrian 
campaign, what must*? 





82 


Page 83 


provide each prince, what he has in Spain and what he has to provide here. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18335. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 16, 1811. 


I am assured that the food is very bad in the lycées of Paris. The young people complain that it is 
very bad, and that there is especially very bad meat. Go to some of these high schools and make sure of 
the truth of these facts. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18336. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 16, 1811. 


Order that, whenever the Pupil regiments will march, they will only proceed half a step, unless 
otherwise ordered, and have a stay every four days of march. Warn of this your offices and the leaders 
of this body. 

According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18337. TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERFUL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 16, 1811. 


My Cousin, we must prepare the Guard to enter the field. Make me a report first on the cavalry; 
all that is in Spain will join me. Let me know what will be the situation of my cavalry, indicating the 
completeness of each regiment and the actual strength, men and horses, and what is lacking to enter the 
field. 

I want my light horse to have half rifles each. Give me a report on the elite gendarmerie, 
indicating where it is and how many men I can have in the field. 

For the infantry, my intention is to have, Ist division: six regiments of voltigeurs, a regiment of 
National guard of the Guard,** 





83 


Page 84 


forming fourteen battalions or 10,000 men; 2nd division six regiments of sharpshooters, to whom will be 
added the conscripts of the Italian guard, which will make fourteen battalions or 10,000 men; 3rd 
division: the two regiments of fusiliers, the two of chasseurs, the regiment of flankers, forming ten 
battalions or 8,000 men; Ist division: the three regiments of grenadiers, the two battalions of royal 
velites, two battalions of Italian lines, forming ten battalions or 8,000 men. The strength of the four 
divisions combined would be 36,000 men. 

The Ist division will be served by the Ist company of conscripts gunners, serving eight pieces of 
4; the 2nd division will have the 2nd company, serving eight pieces of 4; the 3rd and 4th divisions will 
have the 3rd and 4th companies, each serving eight pieces of 4. 

Independently of this, the three Italian regimental companies will serve eighteen pieces of 
cannon, which will be attached, namely, to the 4th division, twelve pieces, and to the second division, 
SiX pieces. 

The Ist Division will have an eight-piece artillery battery; and a horse serving six pieces. The 
2nd, 3rd and 4th divisions will have the same number of coins. Thus the Ist division will have twenty- 
two pieces, the 2nd division twenty-eight, the third division twenty-two; the fourth division thirty-four; 
which will make one hundred and six pieces. The four horse artillery batteries of the Guard serving 
twenty-four pieces of cannon, the six companies on foot of the old Guard serving forty-eight pieces, two 
reserve batteries of the league, on foot, serving sixteen pieces of 12 a mounted artillery company of the 
Italian guard, serving six pieces, and a foot-piece serving eight pieces, will form one hundred and two 
reserve artillery pieces, attached to the Guard cavalry and the army reserve. 

The Guard will therefore have two hundred and eight pieces of cannon, namely: thirty-two 
pieces served by the companies of conscripts of the Guard and eighteen served by the Italian regimental 
companies, fourteen served by the Italian guard, including a battery on horseback, twenty - four on 
horseback served by the Guard, forty-eight pieces on foot served by the Guard, twenty-four on 
horseback served by the line, thirty-two on foot served by the line, sixteen of the reserve battery; total, 
two hundred and eight pieces. 

ARTILLERY FRANCHSE. - One hundred and twenty-eight pieces of artillery on foot, forty- 
eight pieces of artillery on horseback; total, one hundred and seventy-six French pieces. 

ITALIAN ARTILLERY. - Eighteen pieces served by the companies™ 


84 


Page 85 


Italian regiments, six pieces served by the artillery on horseback, eight pieces served by the artillery on 
foot; total, thirty - two pieces Italian. 

Grand total, two hundred and eight guns. 

I write to General Sorbier for the artillery. Confront yourself with the general commanding 
engineer for engineering. It takes a company of sappers in each division, with harnessed tools. The 
Guard must have a pontoon company with a small deck crew. 

What does the Guard have in military crews, bringing back all that is in Spain? Make me a report 
on that organization. 

The Ist Division needs 4 ambulance caissons, 28 military transport caissons, which, with the 
forges, caissons for papers, etc., will make about forty wagons. The other divisions need the same 
number of wagons; which will make 160 wagons for the Guard. But these 160 wagons would only carry 
bread for four days; Assuming 40,000 rations per day, it would be necessary to have means to carry 
400,000 rations, or 100 more wagons. So it would be about 300 caisson, it would take the Guard. 
Organize this in detail. 

Make also the organization of the administration: commissioners of the wars, surgeons, 
foodstuffs, etc., finally all that it is necessary to complete it. 

As for the cavalry, it must be considered as composed of two divisions, since I will not have 
nearly 6,000 horses, including the 600 horses of the Italian guard, and because it is possible that the six 
regiments of lancers and part of the Italians are often detached. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria. 


18338. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris. December 16, 1811. 


Cousin, you have two crews of sailors in the 32nd Military Division who are to train 1,600 men. 


My intention is that in the event of war one of these battalions, well armed and well equipped, march 
with even army corps and be attached to Danzig to the deck crew. Let me know* 


85 


Page 86 


which of the two battalions is better for this service, and what is to be done for its equipment. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl, 


18339. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. December 16, 1811. 


My Son, I do not know whether I have told you that it was necessary for your troops to have a 
pair of shoes on their feet, two pairs in the sack, and one or two pairs in the caissons; it's up to the 
regiments to get some. By this means, we can hope that they will arrive on the Vistula with two pairs of 
shoes in the bag and a pair on their feet. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenborg, 


18340. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris, December 16, 1811. 


My Son, here is the organization I would like to give to the observation corps of Italy. 

The first division of the observation corps of Italy will meet in Trento and Bolzano. It will be 
composed (I fix the day) of two battalions of the 8th light infantry, four battalions of the 84th, four 
battalions of the 92nd, four battalions of the 106th and two Croatian battalions, total, sixteen battalions. 
This division will carry the number 13, having decided to give a general number to all the divisions of 
the Grande Armée. 

The 2nd division will be composed of two battalions of the 18th light, four battalions of the 9th, 
four battalions of the 35th, four battalions of the 53rd and two Spanish battalions; total sixteen 
battalions. This division will be the 14th division. 

The 3rd division, which will be the 15th, will be composed of sixteen Italian and Dalmatian 
battalions. 

These three divisions will present a force of 38,000 men. 

The following regiments would be left in Italy: 

FRENCH REGIMENTS. - 22nd light infantry, six battalions; 6th in line, three; 14th light, three; 
112th line, five; 13th, five; 23rd, two; the 5th battalions of the six French regiments composing the 13th 
and 14th divisions, six battalions; 10th in line, two battalions; 20th, two; 7th, one; 12th, one; Ist light, 
two; 3rd, one; 67th of line,*® 





86 


Page 87 


one; Illyrian regiment, one; 52nd league, five; 102nd, two: which would make forty-eight French 
battalions on the outskirts of the Alps, forming 30,000 infantrymen, who will be completed by the lifting 
of the conscription which will be made, that of 1812. 

FOREIGN REGIMENTS. - Swiss regiments, two battalions; la, Tour d'Auvergne, four; 
Isembourg, four; foreign regiment, one; total, eleven battalions, 8,000 men, with the Italians and the 
axons nearly 50,000. 

ITALIAN REGIMENTS. - The 4th remaining battalions. Write me this state in good standing. 

For the cavalry, a 9th company will be formed for each regiment, to be left in Italy with the sick 
and sickly men, and to be repaired so as to have 500 horses in three months. 

The Royal Guard would be composed as it is and will be destined to join the Imperial Guard. 

Each division of the observation corps of Italy will be composed of three brigades. The two 
French divisions being thus organized, let me know what will be lacking to their completeness so that 
each battalion has 800 men under arms at his departure. The 18th light, the Croats, the Spaniards and the 
8th light are worn in full force. I suppose that the other French regiments have not enough 600 men at 
each regiment to be full of 3,000 men, which would be 3,600 men, and I will give orders to be furnished 
to you as soon as you have them. sent the state. These men can be taken in the two battalions of the 2nd 
regiment of the Mediterranean, strong of 1,600 men. The battalions of the Ist regiment of the 
Mediterranean which are in Corsica and with the island of Elba will be able to supply 3,000 men . 

Six regiments with four battalions make twenty-four battalions. One could have the same twenty- 
four battalions by taking eight regiments with three battalions, and one could add thus the 112th and the 
13th of line; but what would remain in Italy would be much weaker, for it is better to keep the 112th and 
the 13th, which can easily be increased by one battalion than to have four battalions, which will be the 
scum of the corps, and which will offer no resource in Italy; instead of keeping in Italy on the 13th and 
112th, if the English attacked Naples, Venice, Tuscany, or Genoa, we could at once assemble some forty 
elite battalions, French, Italian, and foreign, independently Forty-five battalions to garrison and occupy 
the country. 

I will lift the conscription of 1812, and my intention is to complete®’ 


87 


Page 88 


by this levy all the 4th and 5th battalions, and leave it entirely in Italy and France for the guard of the 
country. 

An active division of at least 6,000 men would be formed in Piedmont, three in the kingdom of 
Italy, one on the side of Isonzo, and one on the Apennine side, each of 6,000 men, one on the frontiers of 
Naples, of 6,000 so that, independently of the 5th battalions which would be confined in the places of 
Palmanova, Mantua, Peschiera, and Ancona, there would be five or six active divisions, commanded by 
generals of division and brigade, which could reunite promptly on the point that would be threatened. 

Trace me the project of organization of these bodies, by making me know the places where they 
would be placed and what the kingdom of Italy could provide. The corps of Isonzo would be primarily 
intended to monitor Palmanova, Venice, Trieste and Dalmatia; he would naturally be well placed on the 
side of Udine. Another corps would be charged with watching Ancona, Genoa, Livorno, Rome; this 
body would naturally be well placed in Bologna. The corps which would be in charge of the surveillance 
- Naples, Rome, Ancona and Livorno - would naturally be well placed on the side of Rome; the King of 
Naples, who has an army of 24,000 men, could powerfully assist him. In six days one could have 6,000 
men, in twelve days 18,000 men, and in twenty or twenty-five days 30,000 men united on the point to be 
attacked. This will undoubtedly lead you to think that it is necessary to leave in Italy four or five good 
regiments. If you need information, you can ask Borghese. Italy, being one, must be included in the 
same organization. The slightest movement that would be felt in one part would be felt in the other; it 
must therefore be contained everywhere. 

As for the artillery, the ten regiments will each have two pieces, which will be twenty. The two 
French divisions will have a battery on horseback and a battery on foot, totaling twenty-eight pieces. 
The dragons will have two light artillery batteries, twelve pieces. Independently of this, there will be a 
reserve which will be two artillery batteries on foot, each of six pieces of 12 and two Prussian howlers or 
unicorns, sixteen pieces; total, 76 guns, of which only 56 served by line artillery. The 7th bis battalion, 
which must be in full force, will easily suffice to service these pieces. 

The Italian artillery will consist of ten to twelve regimental pieces, fourteen pieces of line 
artillery, a six-piece reserve battery of 12 and two howitzers, and a battery.*® 


88 


Page 89 


six-piece light artillery for the cavalry; total, thirty-eight pieces of cannon, and, by removing the ten 
pieces of regiment, twenty-eight pieces of cannon. Finally, the Royal Guard will have its eighteen pieces 
of artillery served by the regimental companies, and fourteen served by the companies of artillery, guard 
and on foot; total, 32 guns. 

The eighteen regimental pieces will be of 4 or 3. 

It is necessary to have sappers and hitched tools. Let me know if from Ist to 10th of January the 
three divisions of the observation corps can be united, Ist in Trento and Bolzano, 2nd in Brescia and 3rd 
in Verona, and the cavalry around, with all the artillery well hitched, double supply of caissons, 
companies of the train of the genius and at least 6,000 tools harnessed, so that in February this corps can 
be put in campaign. 

The 9th battalion of the military crews which is at Placentia, of which you will send the review, 
and the Italian caissons will be able to speak all that is necessary. It will be necessary that this body 
march by division, so as to arrive quickly on Regensburg. I do not need to tell you that these orders must 
be executed with as much mystery as possible, and that the gazelles must not speak and give no warning. 

The light cavalry will be composed, namely: Ist brigade, the 6th of hussars and the 8th of 
chasseurs; 2nd Brigade, 6th and 25th chasseurs; 3rd Brigade, the 9th and 19th of chasseurs; 4th brigade, 
the 2nd and 3rd regiment of Italian hunters. 

I think the 4th of chasseurs have already left Turin. These four brigades will take the general 
numbers; the Ist brigade will be the 10th, the 2nd will be the 11th, the 3rd will be the 12th, and the 4th 
will be the 13th. 

Each brigade will start with 1,200 horses, with the exception of the Italian brigade, which will be 
1,600; but the other brigades will soon receive 400 horsepower deposits. Each regiment of cavalry will 
leave the cadres of the 9th company well complete and 50 horses, which will be quickly quadrupled. 
Present me cavalry generals to command these brigades. 

I did not even communicate this to the Minister of War. Write me this work in good standing; 
put in there the officers, the artillery companies, the engineering, the boxes and all other details perfectly 
in condition. Let me know also what is missing in detail for each body; I will then give you orders for 
execution. 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuehtenberg.*” 





89 


Page 90 


18341. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
A CASSEL. 
Paris. December 17, 1811. 


Brother, I receive your letter of December 13th. I I do not see in the states that accompany it the 
organization of the artillery, the engineers, the crews and caissons of every kind of your army. I do not 
see the ambulance caissons, the military transport caissons for food. Your army needs to have a quantity 
of wagons needed to carry ten days of food. I do not see either the organization of the corps that you 
want to leave in Kassel to guard the country, suppress the insurrections and go where it would be 
necessary. 

General Morio is quite incapable of commanding your army corps. You must keep him near you 
as grand marshal or aide-de-camp, or charge him to command the genius of your army. These sixteen 
thousand men, commanded by this general, would be of no value. I do not see either a man capable of 
commanding the cavalry and knowing how to get out of a charge. 

Finally your corps needs, to enter the campaign, to be provided with all the necessary equipment 
for this purpose. It is necessary that he has sappers and tools to be able to entrench himself. As it appears 
that Prussia will be with me in case of war, your army corps, if it is to be employed beyond the Vistula, 
must be completely organized and equipped with everything. To make the great war, you can not have 
less than forty pieces of cannon and 250 wagons, that is to say 1,200 artillery horses. 

If you must be away from Westphalia, who will govern the country during your absence? What 
forces would you leave him to contain him? 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. Prince Jerome. 


18342. - TO THE GENERAL COMTE DUMAS, 
DIRECTOR OF REVIEWS AND MILITARY CONSCRIPTION, PARIS. 
Paris, December 18, 1811. 


Comte Dumas, I intend the greater part of the conscription that I will raise to complete the 4th 
and Sth battalions, in order to occupy the camp of Boulogne, the Holland and the coasts of? 





90 


Page 91 


the 32nd military division, Cherbourg, Brest, and withdraw from these points the line troops that I have 
there. 

I intend to keep Holland and Hamburg specially by 4th battalions. I would like to have returned 
during the month of February to Harlem and the Hague at least four battalions of 3,000 men, the 
complete and well-dressed cadres, the conscripts dressed and forming there, in order to withdraw the 
18th of the line, that, otherwise, I would have to leave it. 

I would like to have returned to Boulogne for the same period eight 4th battalions, to withdraw 
the troops I have there, and four or five battalions at Brest. 

I wish the lift to be activated in the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, Sth, 6th, 26th, 25th, 24th, 16th, 18th, 15th, 
14th and 13th Military Divisions; these countries being the closest to Paris, one can save a lot of time 
and reduce the time in half. 

By this means, the coast opposite England will be sufficiently well equipped for me to withdraw 
the troops which are there today. In the course of March and April, everything will be strengthened and 
will be formed to put things in the right situation. 

The general principles must be observed in the distribution of conscripts, that is to say, the 
cadres destined to remain in Italy should not receive Italians or men beyond the Alps, but Dauphinians, 
Provengaux, Languedocians, Lyonnais. We have, in fact, fifteen or twenty days before us to draw up the 
elements of the distribution of the district. The principal thing is that the deadlines are advanced for the 
divisions I have mentioned. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18343. -NOTE 
DICTATED IN COUNCIL OF MINISTERS. 
Tuileries Palace. December 18, 1811. 


The conscription was established on the coasts: it resulted that the maritime inscription has 
removed some men. It is concluded that any individual who was enrolled in the registration numbers 
owed nothing to the conscription because he was supposed to be already in an army and on a ship. 

But today the system is changed; the coastal cantons are no longer subject to the conscription of 
land, but to that of sea. It follows that every individual, even forming part of the inscription”! 


91 


Page 92 


maritime, is subject to conscription, unless, by the effect of registration, he is on board a vessel, in which 
case he is in the same position as the conscript voluntarily one year before conscription. A sailor who 
has begun by being a moss and who finds himself, either voluntarily or by the effect of the inscription, 
on a vessel, is not liable to conscription. But no individual can escape by saying that he is required by 
the trustees and that he will go on board. 

This matter is therefore likely to be decided for the organization of the army by the same 
principles as for the army. A man on board is like a voluntary conscript. 

Will it follow from the fact that an individual fired at the conscription and did not fall for the fact 
that he has fulfilled all he owes to the navy? No. This individual of sixteen to twenty years, if he is 
appointed by lot, will become a sailor; if he is not, if he wants to be a man of the land, a wigmaker, a 
carpenter, we will have nothing to say to him, and he will not be worn on the inscription. But if he 
continues to engage in navigation, he is registered, because fishing is allowed, cabotage only for the 
enrollees; and, by the result of the inscription, it is at the disposal of the navy, which takes among the 
enrolled a third, a quarter, according to its needs. It is therefore necessary that the Minister of the Navy 
present a decree which orders, for the past, that all conscripts who did not appear in the draw because 
they were registered have to join the ports, under penalty of being treated as refractory. This operation 
will be a great pleasure to the whole coast, and if the states of these individuals were drawn, there would 
be enormous abuse and evidence that the trustees have tampered with their signature to remove many 
individuals. 

As for Holland, there is no doubt that the inscription must be established as in France. The 
subscription that has been made is only one way of arriving at another order of things. Holland can 
supply 20,000 sailors, who, if they are not ours, will be to the enemy. 

It would be very carefree, if we had a squadron ready from the Texel, to be wanting the sailors 
who are on board the vessels of the Dutch trade. But for this year it is not the question. 

Conscription is due by a man, not because he is a sailor, but because he is French and when he is 
twenty; the inscription is due, not because he is French, but because he practices the sea, 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.” 


92 


Page 93 


18344. - TOM. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IN PARIS, 
Paris. December 19, 1811. 


Monsieur le Duke de Bassano, I wish you to write confidentially to my minister Bignon, in 
Warsaw, to ask him if it would be possible to raise in the Grand Duchy a levy of 3,000 horses for 
chasseurs, hussars and light horse, paying them cash. The horses would have to be sixty months old; we 
would take them at six and seven, 

Also ask my minister in Stuttgart if there would be a way to buy a thousand or two chasseurs and 
hussars horses in Wiirttemberg more than sixty months old. We would take them at six and seven, we 
would pay them money cash. 

Write to my minister in Kassel to know if one could buy in Hannover and Westphalia two 
thousand horses the size of chasseurs, having like the other sixty months, and that one would pay in 
cash. 

Write confidentially to my minister Otto in Vienna, and speak to Prince Schwarzenberg here. 
Ask him if it would be possible to buy in Austria 3 or 4,000 horses of light cavalry which would be paid 
in cash, having the qualities required. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18345, - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 19, 1811, 


Count Montalivet, I would like information as to what France can supply in run-off horses, 
especially for light cavalry. I need it, and it seems that suppliers have a lot of trouble getting it, In 1811, 
I asked 25,000 horses, I could only have 18,000, Let me know the state of the existing horses and what 
is on this object I think of stud inspectors, as well as people who follow this part of the administration. 

According to the minute, Archives of the Empire,’ 


93 


Page 94 


18346. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 19, 1811. 


Duke de Feltre, it is no longer the same hand that directs the formation of my situation reports. 
Those whom I have before my eyes: contain only faults; there must be disorganization in this office. 

In the state of situation in numerical order it is noted that the 4th battalion of the 8th light is on 
the island Santa Margarita, and in the libretto by military division it is said that it is in Porquerolles. 

In the booklet in numerical order it is stated that the 4th battalion of the 18th light will leave 
Turin on the 21st of December, and in the state of the military division it is worn as leaving Antibes. 

In the same state in numerical order I see that the 2nd regiment of the Mediterranean sent its 1st 
and 2nd battalions on Palmanova and Mantua, and that, moreover, it sent a detachment of 500 men who 
is en route to Mantua. I do not know what that means. 

At the 6th line, it is supposed that the 4th battalion, which is at Rome, will form the depot; which 
is not correct. 

I see that in the article of the 7th line, the 42nd and others, the 4th battalion is taken as 
incorporated in the first. What became of the cadres and who gave the order of this incorporation? 

In this same state of situation in numerical order we have not put the note of the conscripts 
which each body has to receive, nor of those which it has received. 

I want you to give me a new state where all these faults are repaired. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18347. -: - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DUMAS, 
DIRECTOR OF REVIEWS AND MILITARY CONSCRIPTION, PARIS. 
Paris, December 19, 1811. 


Present tomorrow to the Council of State the decree for the lifting of the conscription and the 
distribution between the departments. Have it printed that night. Send your flyers on the 20th, so that the 
necessary days count as of December 20th. 

From the minute, Archives of the Empire.” 


94 


Page 95 


18348. - To M. BARBIER, 
LIBRARIAN OF THE EMPEROR, PARIS. 
Paris, December 19, 1811. 


I beg M. Barbier to send me for his Majesty some good works, most suitable for making known 
the topography of Russia, and especially of Lithuania, in relation to marshes, rivers, woods, roads, & c. 
Order of the Emperor, MENEVAL. 
His Majesty wishes also to have what we have in French more detailed on the campaign of 
Charles XII in Poland and Russia. Some works on military operations in this area would also be useful. 
From the original comm. by Mr. Louis Barbier. 


18349. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 19, 1811. 


My Cousin, you must at the moment that he is to have received 60 wagons of the new model of 
the military transports; let me know if you were happy. Could not we have a hundred built in Hamburg 
and Lubeck? By having them made on the spot, how much would it cost? We should have them cheaper 
than in France, and they would all be returned. I have a hundred built in Danzig. I build in Sampigny as 
much as we can build. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame the Marshal Princess Eckmuhl. 


18350. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, December 20, 1811. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, write in digital form to Baron Bignon that, if the war took place, my 
intention is to attach him to my headquarters and to put him at the head of the secret police including 
espionage in the army enemy, translation of intercepted letters and documents, reports of prisoners, etc.; 
that I t is therefore necessary that, from today, he mount a good organization of secret police; that he 
would have to have two Poles speaking well the” 


95 


Page 96 


Russian language, military, having made war, intelligent, and in which one could trust, knowing one 
Lithuania, the other Volyn, Podolia and Ukraine, and a third German speaking and familiar with Livonia 
and Courland. These three officers will be in charge of interrogating the prisoners. They should speak 
perfect Polish, Russian and German. They will have under their command a dozen well-chosen agents, 
who will be paid according to the information they will give. They should also be able to clarify where 
the army would pass. 

I wish Monsieur Bignon to take care of this great organization without delay. By starting this 
organization, the three agents of correspondence will have to have agents on the roads from Petersburg 
to Vilna, from Petersburg to Riga, from Riga to Memel, on the roads of Kiev, and on the three roads 
which, from Bucharest, lead to St. Petersburg, Moscow and Grodno; to send to Riga, to Dunabourg, to 
Pinsk in the marshes, to Grodno, and to give the state of situation of the fortifications day by day. If the 
lessons are satisfactory, I will not regret an expense of 12,000 francs a month. During the war, the 
rewards for those who will give useful advice in time will be undetermined. There are among the Poles 
men who know the fortifications and who can, from these different places, indicate the state in which 
they are. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18351. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 20, 1811. 


Isend you a letter on refusals. Is there something to be done against suppliers who supply sheets 
below the samples? For finally these refusals do not fail to delay the formation of the army. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18352. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris. December 20, 1811. 


My Cousin, I see by your state of situation that you have in the Ist division 1,600 patients in the 


hospitals, 600 in the regimental infirmaries”® 
Page 96 


96 


Page 97 


or in the room, total 2,200 patients; 2nd division, 2,000; 3rd Division, 1,500; at the 4th division, 1,900; 
at the 5th division, 2,500; total for the infantry, 10,100 sick. 

You have, without counting the Spaniards, seventy-nine battalions which, to 900 men each, 
should make 71,000 men. There is a total lack of 3,400 men; you have 10,000 patients, so you have to 
remove 13,000 men. These seventy-nine battalions do not form 58 to 60,000 men under arms before the 
enemy. I suppose that your state, being December Ist, will experience a great improvement on January 
Ist and a bigger one on February Ist. For my part, I order that you send frames to complete the 
workforce. You must not have at this moment 750 men per battalion ready to march; I very much wish 
your situation on the Ist of February to be such, that each battalion should have 800 men under arms, 
that each regiment should have 4,000 men, including officers, and that you should have 64,000 infantry 
to present to the enemy. The 15th light he 200 men to send you from his depot in Paris; the 33rd light 
has 600; other deposits have more or less. As I have not found the battalions of the Isle of Re mentioned 
in your state of affairs among the battalions which you have distributed, I presume that they were not yet 
incorporated on the Ist of December; it must still be worth 3,000 men. Let me know your situation on 
December 15th, and, by a second state, your situation on January Ist. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmihl. 


18353. - TO MARSHCHAL DAVUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG, 
Paris, December 20, 1811. 


Cousin, I see in your army's state of affairs on December Ist that the 9th Polish Lancers 
Regiment has only 472 men. I do not understand that when I buy the horses at my expense and that the 
Grand Duchy has to supply only the men, this regiment is not 1,000 men and 1,000 horses, so press this 
regiment completely. 

I also see that your frames are not complete. Do you still expect something from the depots of 
Strasbourg and Wesel, and the island of Ré and Belle-Ie? 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl.”” 


97 


Page 98 


18354. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, December 21, 1811. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I beg you to do some research and give me the clarification you have on 
this difference (1). 
NAPOLEON 
From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18355. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 21, 1811. 


Cousin, I answer your work on the administration of the Guard. I'm sticking to the organization 
of August 24th. 1 authorizing officer, 6 commissioners of wars and 3 deputies, in all 10, appear to me 
sufficient. A war commissioner or deputy will be attached to each division. The cavalry will count for 
two divisions, 48 health officers seem to me sufficient. 302 employees and administrative workers also 
seem to me sufficient. But it is necessary to maintain the number in full, and to this end you must order 
that as soon as the Guard is gone we have to form again a company of 100 workers, composed mainly of 
bakers, to recruit the companies active. They will then be joined by detachments of 50 men. The 
battalion of the military crews has six companies, 17 officers, 771 men and 1,200 horses; it serves 30 
vans and 12 corps forges, 28 ambulances, 52 food vans; 120 new model wagons, 6 forges, 4 extensions, 
total 252 wagons; which seems to me enough. The distribution will be made, for the vans of 
administration, at the rate of 5 vans by division and 10 in reserve for the cavalry; for ambulance vans, 5 
per division and 8 for cavalry, for the old model food cases, 14 for the first two divisions, and 12 for the 
last two, and without understanding the vans of the Italian guard. I see that all that is missing is 229 
horses, including the 200 horses that are in Spain, the ambulance wagons, 120 new wagons and 6 vans. I 
take a decree for the most important object, which is the purchase of horses. 





1) Between a book of the Russian army and a state handed over by Prince Poniatowski. 
(Note of the original.)”* 


98 


Page 99 


I do not count horses returning from Spain, and therefore I order the purchase of 400 horses. 

As for the wagons that are missing, I think they are made. Make sure that by January 30th 
horses, harnesses, wagons, men, everything is ready to go. Let me know where the 120 wagons are. By 
this means, the Guard will be able to carry in its wake 120 wagons of the new model 480,000 rations, on 
vans 45,000, total 525,000; which will provide food for 50,000 men for ten days. In addition, the 7th 
Battalion of the Military Crews will be under the orders of the Presiding Officer of the Guard and 
organized as the other Guard crews, with 252 wagons, carrying a million rations of biscuit, which will, 
for 50,000 men during twenty days, 1,525,000 rations. The Guard will therefore have food for 50,000 
men for thirty days, regardless of what vans and other wagons attached to the corps will carry. I judge 
this supply necessary, because the Guard is the last one. 

The Minister of War Administration will place at the disposal of the paying officer the money 
necessary to put the 7th Battalion in order. The authorizing officer will ensure that the returns of this 7th 
battalion are made, that the wagons are in good condition and the battalion well organized. He will be 
passing the review at Metz, for it is useless for the battalion to come to Paris. You yourself, have an eye 
on the organization of this battalion. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame the Marshal Duchess of Istria. 


18356, - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 21, 1811. 


Cousin, I see from your work that the strength of the cavalry of the Guard is 6,450, and that 400 
men are missing in full. I made a decree for the following regiments, namely, Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 10th 
hussars, 10th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 22nd, 26th, 27th, 28th. the 30th of chasseurs, each supply 10 men with 
the required qualities; which will make 140 men. These men will be taken from the depots, and, if not at 
the depots of these regiments, the number of men requested having the requisite qualities, the surplus, 
having these qualities, will be drawn from the squadrons of war which are in Spain. The twenty dragon 
regiments that are in Spain will provide” 





99 


Page 100 


each 10 men; which will make 200 men. The sixteen regiments of cuirassiers and carabineers will each 
provide six men; which will make 96 men. As for the 60 men who miss the 2nd light horse regiment, the 
velites will complete them. By this means, the cavalry of the Guard will be complete, that is to say 
increased to 6,800 men. 

543 horses are missing; I issued a decree ordering them to be procured, namely: 188 for 
chasseurs a cheval, 65 for Mamelukes, 176 for dragoons, 79 for mounted grenadiers, 22 for the elite 
gendarmerie and 13 for the 2nd regiment of light horses. Give orders for this return to take place without 
delay; but take care that only horses are taken which have thrown up their thistle and are sixty months 
old on the Ist of February. 4,057 men are present, 332 are posted in France and will join; 1,200 are in 
Spain and will join; I count, therefore, that with the 500 men that will be supplied, it will be 6,000 
cavalry men in the field, or sixty squadrons. Check yourself out to see why there are 440 men and 400 
horses not available. It is important that on the 1st of February I have these 6,000 men ready to walk. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame the Maréchale Duchess of Istria. 


18357. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERES, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDER IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 21, 1811. 


Cousin, I received your work on the engineers of the Guard. I decided that the line would 
provide three sapper companies with their, tools, 3 captains, 3 lieutenants and 3 sub-lieutenants; that the 
company of sappers of the Guard would do the service near the 4th division, as well as 2 senior officers 
of the engineers of the Guard; this company will have its tools like the other companies of the Guard. 
These companies will be under the orders of the other commanders of the Guard. Therefore, there will 
be nothing to change at the current organization. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame the Maréchale Duchess of Istria. ” 


Page 101. 


18358. - TO GENERAL CAULAINCOURT, DUKE OF VICENCE, 
GRAND ECUVER, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 21, 1811. 


You will have each of my orderly officers pay 20,000 francs, so that they can equip themselves 
and have everything the regulations require them to have. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18359. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, December 23, 1811. 


Cousin, give the order to return to France to the two companies of horse artillery of the Guard, 
the two companies of artillery with foot of the Guard, the workmen of artillery of the Guard and the 
soldiers of the train of the Guard. 

The army of the North will henceforth have only the following artillery, namely: a horse-drawn 
artillery battery served by the horse-drawn artillery company to be furnished by the Army of Portugal: 
Six pieces; two batteries of artillery on foot served by the 8th and 17th companies of the 6th Foot 
Artillery Regiment, which were intended for the reserve of the Army of Spain, each consisting of six 
pieces of six and two howitzers: sixteen rooms; total, twenty-two pieces. Thus the North Army will have 
six howitzers and sixteen pieces of six; which, with the two pieces of the battalion of Neuchatel, will 
make twenty-four pieces. 

You will order that the 34th Light and the 130th form their artillery companies. It will be given 
to each two pieces of 4; which will carry the artillery pieces of the North Army to twenty-eight. 

As for the train, you will order that the 4th, 5th and 6th companies of the 10th main battalion, 
forming about 300 men and 450 horses well harnessed and in good condition, leave to go to Burgos. See 
the artillery office at the War Office to find out where these three companies should take the artillery 
equipment, as it says above. 

The artillery of the Guard will go to Vitoria, and as soon as the 450 horses of the three 
companies of the 10th main battalion of the train have arrived at Vitoria, the artillery of the Guard will 
go to France. Before leaving, however, the Guard will yield as many horses and equipment as needed to 
complete the three companies of the 10th Battalion”! 


101 


Page 102 


the main one, which has 450 horses and can, I believe, use 550. That will be 100 horses: that the Guard 
will yield to him. 
Before the 4th; the 5th and 6th companies of the 10th main depart, you will order that the 72 men 
of this battalion who are in the depot of Toulouse be incorporated there. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18360. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris. December 24, 1811. 


Cousin, you will find attached a letter which I send to the Minister of War. As the minister will 
take five or six days to dispatch the order contained in it, I would like you to send it to the marshal 
tonight so that the executives of the 4th regiments of skirmishers and voltigeurs arrive as soon as 
possible. . 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18361. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, December 24, 1811. 


Cousin, I receive your letter on the distribution of an eleventh convoy of funds. I have no 
objection to sending the army of Portugal 500,000 francs; to the Army of the Center, 200,000 francs; to 
the King, 500,000 francs; in Santona, 200,000; total, 1,400,000 francs, of which 750,000 francs in silver 
and 650,000 francs in drafts. 

Prepare a twelfth convoy that will be taken from the funds and the account of 1811, that I intend 
to completely pay the gendarmerie squadrons of Navarre, Biscay and Burgos, also all that is in 
Santander, such as the 130" regiment. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18362. - TO THE GENERAL DUROSNEL, 
AIDE DE CAMP OF THE EMPEROR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 24, 1811. 


102 
Please send me notes on the seventeen generals of 


102 


Page 103 


brigade of cavalry, whose names follow: Beurmann (1), Burthe, Corbineau, Dejean, Delort, 
d'Oullernhourg, Ferriere (who has been in the service of Holland), Konopka, Margaron, Mouriez, 
Ornano, Queunot) Saint-Genies , Dornes, Guitton, Quinette and Reynaud (2). 

What are the best four to use in light cavalry and the most fit to serve as outposts; and those to 
use in the line cavalry? 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18363. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 24, 1811. 


Cousin, I read carefully your letter of December 19th. Here's how I want things to be settled. 
Your authorizing officer will give you a report, which will show that for so many days, so many 
thousand men and horses, beyond the number fixed by the conventions, have been borne by Westphalia; 
that this number of men and horses must have cost so much to Westphalia, and you will diminish on 
every object 25 per cent of the price where things are in the 32nd military division, to equal the money 
that comes out of my house; thus the ration of fodder will be less than 20 sous, the hospital day less than 
20 sous. We can also count the supply of sheets. The food of the Westphalian troops in Danzig will be 
compensated for. The conclusion of this report will be that such a quantity of troops has occasioned so 
much expense at Westphalia, not to mention the pay. You will communicate this result to my minister, 
and you will write to him that, in view of the report of the intendant of the army, the intention of his 
majesty being to do something advantageous to Westphalia, you order that the balance of the surplus 
troops who were in the charge of the King are paid up to the same price, and you beg the King to pay the 
rest. The King will acquit or not, since the note of my minister to the Westphalian Minister will be 
confidential, and will not make known the reason, but will be limited to saying that a sum of so much 
has been sent to pay the balance of 12,500 men and that it remains due so much to align the balance. By 
this means, this will not be the rule for the other princes of the Confederation or for Westphalia, which, 
when it receives a greater amount of 





1) Beurmann (Frederick Augustus). — 2) Reynaud (Nicolas). me 





Page 104 


troops, will not be afraid; and so you will have sold the troops that are in Westphalia. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl, 


18364. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, December 25, 1811. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I send you very important documents on the Sieur Bourrienne. I beg you 
to make a report to me and to keep these pieces for you, for it requires the greatest secrecy. Everything 
leads me to think that this individual has intrigues followed in London: Bring me this business 
Thursday. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18365. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 25, 1811. 


Twelve brigades of French light cavalry and one brigade of Italian cavalry will be formed. These 
brigades will be organized and will carry the following numbers: 

Ist brigade, 2nd chasseurs, 9th light Polish cavalry, who is in my pay in Danzig, brigadier 
general, Pajol. 

Reiterate the orders for the 9th Polish to be completed to 1,000 men and 1,000 horses at my 
expense, taking horses and men to Poland. 

2nd brigade, Ist and 3rd of chasseurs; Brigadier General, Bordesoulle. 

3rd Brigade, 7th Hussars and 9th Light Horse; Brigadier General, Jacquinot. 

Ath brigade, 8th of hussars and 7th of chasseurs; Brigadier General, Pyré. 

5th brigade, 23rd and 24th chasseurs; Brigade General, Castex. 

6th brigade, 7th and 20th chasseurs and 8th light horse; Brigadier General, Corbineau. 

7th brigade, the 11th and 12th of chasseurs; Brigadier General, Saint-Geniés. 

8th Brigade, 5th and 9th hussars; Brigade General, Burthe. 

9th Brigade, 11th Hussars and 6th Light Horse; Brigadier General, Mouriez. 


104 


Page 105 


10th Brigade, 6th and 25th chasseurs; Brigadier General, Gerard. 

11th brigade, 6th hussars and 8th chasseurs; Brigadier General, Gauthrin. 

12th Brigade, 9th and 19th of chasseurs; brigadier general, Ferriere. 

13th Brigade, 2nd and 3rd Italian Fighter Regiments; general of Italian brigade, Villata. 

The first five brigades are part of the observation corps of the Elbe; they must complete their 
return to Germany, under the inspection of the generals of division and brigade. 

Generals Corbineau, Saint-Geniés, Burthe, and Mouriez, will be ordered to go over the regiments 
of their brigades, to receive the horses, and will take all necessary measures so that these regiments may 
enter the strongest campaign as possible in February. They will see the Minister of War Administration 
to take his instructions. They will stay alternately at one and the other regiment. A brigadier general will 
be sent to the 6th Military Division to preside over the reorganization and organization of the 4th 
squadrons of light cavalry and dragoons whose regiments are in Italy. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18366. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 25, 1811. 


The cuirassiers will be organized as follows: 

The Ist Division, commanded by General Saint-Germain, will be composed of 2nd, 3rd and 9th 
Cuirassiers. Each regiment will form a brigade, being eight squadrons. There will be three brigade 
generals, namely: Bessiéres, Brunot and Queunot. 

The 5th Division will consist of the 12th, 6th and 11th Cuirassiers. There will be | general of 
division and 3 brigadier generals; these will be the generals Reynaud, Quinette and Dejean. 

The 2nd division of cuirassiers will be composed of the 5th regiment, the 10th and the 8th 
regiment. Brigadier Generals Beaumont, Richter and Dornes will be employed in this division. 

The 3rd division will be commanded by General Doumere; it will be composed of the 4th, 7th and 14th 
regiment of cuirassiers. Brigadier Generals Berkheim, Lhéritier and d'Oullembourg will be employed in 
this division. 

The 4th Division will be composed of Ist, 2nd Regiment of Carabinieri” 


105 


Page 106 


and Ist Cuirassiers, Brigadier Generals Schwartz and Paultre will be employed in this division. You will 
accordingly order these generals to be returned for the Ist of February to the headquarters of their 
division. 

You will order the Prince of Eckmiihl to form the 5th Division, and for this purpose you will 
order the 6th and 11th regiment of cuirassiers to leave Erfurt to go to Hanover. This 5th division will be 
formed in Hanover and in Mecklenburg, Twelve pieces of light artillery will be attached to this division. 

As the companies of light artillery could miss, we will take one of those of the observation corps 
of the Ocean and one of those of the body of the Elbe, which will be replaced by a company on foot. 

The Ist regiment of lancers will be attached to the Ist division of cuirassiers; the 2nd regiment in 
the 2nd division; the 3rd regiment at the 3rd division; the 4th regiment to the 4th division, and the 5th 
regiment to the 5th division. Each Lancers Regiment will supply three squadrons completed to nearly 
800 men and 800 horses. You will let me know if on the Ist of February you will be able to send out a 
squadron of 250 men well dressed and well equipped for the divisions of cuirassiers; if on March Ist the 
2nd squadron can leave, and the 3rd squadron on April 15th. Assuming that each regiment of cuirassiers 
is 900 horses on March Ist, the increase of 800 light horse will bring the strength of the division to 
3,500 horses. 

You will make an order on the service of the light horse with the cuirassiers. Under no 
circumstances may cuirassiers be given in prescriptions. This service will be done by lancers; the 
generals themselves will use lancers. The service of correspondence, of escort, that of skirmishers, will 
be flee by the lancers. 

When the cuirassiers charge infantry columns, the light horses must be placed on the rear or on 
the flanks, to pass in the intervals of the regiments and to fall on the infantry when it is in rout, or, if the 
we are dealing with the cavalry, the cavalry, and pursuing the sword in the loins. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18367. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 25, 1811, 


Mr. Duke de Feltre, I think it is appropriate to change the formation of the 6th division of the 
observation corps of the Elbe, which was not: 





106 


Page 107 


still formed only on paper. Consequently, this division will be composed of fifteen battalions, namely: 
four battalions of the 24th light, which will leave Paris on January 16th, four battalions of the 19th line, 
which will leave Boulogne on January 15th, four battalions of the 56th, which will leave on January 20, 
and three battalions of the 128th Two battalions will be provided on the spot; the third battalion will 
leave as soon as possible. 

The 6th Division will meet on the Ist of January at Osnabriick with its artillery, engineering, 
administration, & c. General Legrand will command it; it will be returned to Osnabriick on February 1st. 
Brigadier Generals Albert and Maison will be employed in this division. You will consult General 
Legrand to appoint the third brigadier general and the warrant officer commander necessary for the 
division, which will be composed of three brigades. 

From the Ist of January, General Legrand will take the command, the chiefs of corps will 
address their demands, and he will work with you and with the Minister of the Administration of War 
for the formation and organization of his division. 

The four battalions of the 24th light will be 800 men present under arms on Ist February in 
Osnabriick. He misses, I believe, to be at this complete 600 men. Present me a plan to detach the 5th 
battalions of light infantry whose regiments are in Spain the men available to train the 600 men 
necessary to recruit this regiment; the 21st, 28th, 27th, 17th, 25th, 6th, 2nd, 4th, 12th, 16th, 23rd, etc., 
can provide these 600 men. Choose from each depot what can be drawn from it. 

The 8th division will be composed of seventeen battalions, namely: four battalions of the 11th light 
infantry regiment, five battalions of the 2nd line regiment, five battalions of the 37th and three battalions 
of the 124th. It will meet in Miinster and Wesel. Major General Verdier will have the command; it will 
be returned to Miinster on February Ist. Brigadier-General Viviés will be employed in this division; he 
will be appointed two other brigadier generals and an adjutant commander. This division will have three 
brigades like the 6th division; General Verdier will take command on January Ist. 

The 9th Division will be composed of seventeen battalions, namely: two Croatian battalions that 
will leave on January 2 from Paris, well dressed and well equipped, twelve Swiss battalions and three 
battalions of the 123". Each Swiss regiment will first provide two battalions with a company artillery, 
each battalion completed to 840 men, and as soon as the recruits arrive, each regiment will form its” 


107 


Page 108 


3rd Battalion. The battalions that go from Cherbourg to Paris, those who are in Paris, will leave Paris on 
the 15th of January. Order their deposits to send to Paris what they have available; Have the artillery 
company come to Marseilles. The two battalions who go to Besan¢gon will embark in Strasbourg on the 
Rhine to move to Wesel. 

The two battalions of the 123rd which are at Boulogne will leave on the 15th of January; they 
will go to Saint-Omer where is their depot; they will stay there five or six days; they will take all the 
men available to complete the first two battalions at 1,600 men; after which they will go to Nijmegen. 
The 4th battalion at Magdeburg will be part of this regiment; he will remain in Magdeburg until further 
notice. 

General Belliard will have the command of this division; General Amey will serve under his 
orders as Brigadier General. General Belliard will make known which two other Brigadier Generals he 
desires to command his two other brigades, and the adjutant commander whom he desires for chief of 
staff. 

According to the copy, Depot of War. 


18368. - TO GENERAL SAVARY, DUKE OF ROVIGO, 
MINISTER OF GENERAL POLICE, PARIS. 
Paris, December 25, 1811. 


Count Saint-Priest, being on the list of the maintained, should not be in France; however, I learn 
that he is in Geneva. His sons continue to be in enemy service, and he corresponds with them on all 
kinds of news. Order that this individual evacuate not only France, but all the countries occupied by the 
French army. 

From the minute, Archives of the Empire. 


18369. - TO THE CAPTAIN OF FRIGATE FERETIER, 
Palace of the Tuileries, December 25, 1811. 


Captain Feretier, we inform you that we have placed under your command our frigates Ariane 


and Andromache and our brig Mameluk, with the intention that you cross the ocean, as long as you will 
judge suitable, to do all the possible harm to the enemy. °° 


108 


Page 109 


You have the relays of all the ports of the United States of America, with which we are at peace. 
When you think you must return, we wish you to return to the Mediterranean to join our squadron of 
Toulon, if circumstances make you think proper. 

We have received information which gives us reason to believe that a certain number of our 
subjects, prisoners of war, were thrown on the island of Cabrera, near Majorca, and we wish that, if the 
circumstances favor you sufficiently for but, without compromising the division under your command, 
to remove these prisoners, or part of them, you should carry out this operation, which will be particularly 
agreeable to us. 

We instruct our Navy Minister to send you detailed instructions on your mission. He will let you 
know that we are giving you the freedom to lead or cruises and to extend the duration, as you think best 
suited to our service, convinced that, by your slash, your talents and your activity, you will justify the 
trust of which we honor you. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Naval Archives. 


18370. - TO PRINCE CAMBACERE, 
ARCHICHANCELIER OF THE EMPIRE, PARIS. 
Paris. December 26, 1811. 


My cousin, Count Auguste Talleyrand, at his wedding, declared to his wife's family that he had a 
sum of 200,000 francs, as given to him by his cousin the Prince of Benevento, then Minister of Foreign 
Relations. The Prince of Benevento, however, demanded promissory notes for the said sum. These bills, 
which have since been placed in circulation, are in the hands of the agents of exchange; so that, if they 
were not to be paid in a short time, Count Auguste Talleyrand would be dishonored. I can not approve of 
this double procedure. The matrimonial clauses are sacred, and since it was said that the Prince of 
Benevento gave 200,000 francs, he ought not to demand notes; but, since he had demanded them, 
delicacy did not allow him to put them into circulation. Having made the sacrifice of 2,200,000 francs to 
purchase the Prince of Benevento's Hotel, in order to facilitate the arrangement of his affairs, I desire 
that this sum should serve also to settle the affair of Count Auguste Talleyrand.'” 





Page 110 


I accordingly ordered the intendant general of my extraordinary domain to retain this sum. My intention 
is that you speak to the Prince of Benevento, to Count Auguste Talleyrand, and that you constitute their 
arbitrator. If the 200,000 francs are to be paid by Count Auguste Talleyrand, you will determine the 
times at which it will be reasonable to fix the payments, and you will finish this affair by giving it the 
form of a family arrangement and not a commitment of commerce, which must not take place between 
people of honor. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by the Duke de Cambaceres. 


18371. - TO MADAME LA COMTESSE AUGUSTE TALLEYRAND. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


Countess Talleyrand, I receive your letter; I see the embarrassments where you are. I order 
Count Defermon, steward of my extraordinary domain, to use 200,000 francs on what he owes the 
Prince of Benevento to pay for the promissory notes which your husband has improperly signed. I have 
charged my cousin the archchancellor to make an arbitral judgment to convert these bills of exchange 
into family bills; see him for that purpose. I am very glad to have found this opportunity to do a right 
thing and which, at the same time, is pleasant to you. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18372. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


I took a decree to arm the cuirassiers of a carabiner and the lancers of a carabine. Make a 
settlement to give them that. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18373.- TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


Monsieur le Duke de Feltre, I send you the dispatches of General Decaen, make a line of what 
has happened; that it is satisfactory enough to satisfy the generals, but without, however, giving too 
much importance to operations against peasants, ''° 





110 


Page 111 


Write to General Decaen that I have seen with difficulty that he has disorganized the Frere 
division, since, by this measure, there are no more active forces in the south of Catalonia, between 
Lerida, Tortosa, and Barcelona; that it is necessary that he dissipate the gatherings which are made on 
Vicq, and that he prepares a convoy on the ground for Barcelona. There are carriages carrying 40 and 50 
thousand: a hundred of these wagons could speak a convoy of 5,000 quintals of flour, which would 
supply Barcelona for two months and would wait for the good season; we could add all the mules we 
could find. Let me know the number of coaster buildings left from Agde since October, those arrived in 
Barcelona and those who were caught. I suppose that Marshal Suchet blew up the fortifications of 
Tarragona, less that which had a place, and that he kept only a small one: 

Instruct General Decacn that Marshal Suchet had to surround Valencia on the 25th and open the 
trench on the 26th. He hopes to remove the entrenched camp that day, which will give great facilities for 
attacking the city; so that it was hoped that in the course of January the city would be taken, present me 
the requests for advancement for Catalonia. 

I have ordered the Minister of Finance to send to Barcelona 400,000 francs in silver and 500,000 
in drafts, half for the pay of the garrison and half for the purchase of corn, etc. This last part will be 
arranged by the Minister of Finance. General Decaen and Adjutant Commander Nisas that, until this 
hour, the markets for cabotage have been unsuccessful, that a market should be made to carry on the 
land the garrison of Barcelona needs 8,000 rations a day, which per month makes 3,000 quintals; it is 
necessary to consider all the markets that have been made by cabotage as intended for the supply of 
siege. It would now be necessary to have a regular contract for a convoy of 3,000 quintals per month, 
carried by a single convoy of large sails, and sent expressly regularly; irrespective of an agreed price 
given to the valet and a security interest, they would have the return on their behalf. By first starting a 
convoy in January and February, we would be at least calm for the daily supply of Barcelona. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.''! 


alla 


Page 112 


18374. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNTY OF CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


Count de Cessac, we should take a serious look at the supply of Barcelona. We can not hide from 
ourselves that the expedition which will leave Toulon is very hazardous. It is therefore necessary, 
independently of what one does by sea, to take surer means by taking them on the ground. I have three 
companies of the 3rd battalion of the military crews at Pau, each of which harnesses 40 new model 
wagons; which makes 120 wagons. Each wagons can carry 40 quintals of flour or wheat; that would be 
4,800 quintals that these companies would transport in one trip. Assuming that the daily consumption of 
Barcelona is 9,000 rations, it would only be 100 quintals of flour a day. This transport of 4,800 quintals 
would increase the supply of Barcelona by forty-eight days or two months. The place is supplied until 
March; a single trip would bring this supply until May. 

The 5th Battalion of the year of Catalonia must have 3 or 400 mules; which would increase the 
transport of a thousand quintals. Finally I do not see what would oppose the fact that we make a market 
for a hundred wagons, taking only wagons that carry 40 quintals at least. If it were possible to organize a 
convoy of 3 to 400 wagons, General Decaen would escort him by force; it would be sent out in January, 
which is, in this country, the season of the best season; and Burcelone supplies for April, May, June, 
July, would no longer give cause for concern. After July, the harvest would provide. 

I therefore wish you to report to me on the resources of the country in roll-on-wheels; 2nd, on the 
pack mules which one would find for hire, and on those belonging to the army, which might be disposed 
of; (3) what it is better to send, flour or wheat; finally, on the objections to be made against this 
operation. 

You have 10,000 quintals of grains or flour at Cette; you also have rice. I would attach great 
importance to having a first voyage made in January, which would remove all anxiety for a supply of 
such great interest. 

If we organized a second convoy for the end of February we could thus carry 20,000 quintals, 
that is, supply Barcelona’ ” 


Li 


Page 113 


for two hundred days. Submit your report as soon as possible. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18375. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNTY OF CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


Count Cessac, I have just read your report on Corfu, I wish you to let me know if the following 
results are true. I suppose the consumption of Corfu is 12,000 rations a day; 12,000 rations are 130 
quintals a day. There was at Corfu on October Ist, 18,800 quintals; there was therefore for 14 days. 
There was also a million rations of biscuit; which at 12,000 rations a day; made for 84 days. There was 
therefore in Corfu for 188 days (1). In the course of October, 3,000 quintals came from Otranto, 5,000 
from Toulon, and 5,000 from the Genoa expedition, which is known to have arrived; total, 13,000 
quintals, or for 100 days of food. As of October Ist, there will be 288 days of food in Corfu. 

There is an expedition: 1“ on the quantities ordered in 1810, 14,000 quintals; Phi 10,000 quintals, 
which the viceroy sent from Ancona; 3" 20,000 quintals which the King of Naples has yet to supply; 
and, on what is ordered on behalf of France, the expeditions of Genoa and Toulon being arrived and that 
of Trieste being half lost, it remains to receive 10,500 quintals existing in Tarente, 2,500 quintals 
existing on an expedition to Ancona ( there would be 13,000 quintals in loading at Taranto or Ancona); 
which would make an expedition of 57,000 quintals. Thus, there would be for 100 days in the 
expeditions ready from Brindisi, for another 100 days in those from Taranto to the account of France, 
and finally for 60 days in the convoys that the kingdom of Italy has sent . Assuming a reasonable loss, 
there would be an expedition for 260 days of food; to which must be added the 150 days of food which 
must result from the 20,000 quintals to be sent by the King of Naples: there is therefore an expedition 
for 400 days of food, There was in Corfu on 1 October food insured for 288 days, that is for 10 months; 
which leads from the Ist of October last to the 1st of August 





1) It would take 228 days. This error continues in the letter. ''° 


113 


Page 114 


next. If what is in expedition arrived there, there would be in Corfu for 688 days; which leads to 
September 1, 1813. 

In this situation of things, it seems to me that we have no more need than to make arrive what is 
in expedition and to hold the hand that the King of Naples has its wheat in the course of January in 
Otranto. 

I wish you to consult with the Minister of the Navy to advise on the means to be taken: 1* to pass 
the 10,500 quintals which are at Taranto to the account of France; 2" to pass the 2,500 quintals which 
are at Ancona; 3% to pass the 14,000 quintals that are in Brindisi and Otranto. You also have to make 
new representations to the court of Naples to send the 20,000 quintals. You will examine if it is 
necessary to counter the expedition of Trieste, and if it would not be appropriate to bring the wheat we 
have at Trieste by the Po on Turin, where he would sell himself more. In your report you will report to 
me the result of your conference with the Minister of the Navy, and you will propose to me the measures 
you have deemed necessary. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18376. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


You must distinguish in the garrisons of the vessel what is the 2nd company of the 5th battalions 
of any other garrison troop. The 2nd companies of the 5th Battalions, which are destined to form the 
garrisons of vessel, according to my decree of organization, belong to you; they can not be changed, 
either as officers, non-commissioned officers, or soldiers, except by your order; so that in two years' 
time you will have complete companies, very acclimated to the sea, and which will form irremovable 
naval troops. But in the first moment of organization it is very different, and I wish you not to prevent 
the Minister of War from landing all that is not good as a definitive garrison, that is, anything that is not 
from the 2nd Company of the 5th Battalion. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.'!* 





114 


Page 115 


18877. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
A CASSEL. 
Paris, December 26, 1811. 


Brother, I receive your letter of the 22nd; I answer them without wasting time. I think that 
General Morio, who has your confidence, is very well placed in your house. It is even a distinguished 
official, who would be useful in your general staff or in your genius, these services being analogous; but 
he never led a company of voltigeurs to the fire. Could a perfect honest man and a man of honor desire 
to be grand marshal of a prince who has dethroned his family? He may wish to be colonel or general, 
having recognized you; he may be with honor the grand marshal of your son, but not yours. Suppose a 
defeat, the march of Elector on Cassel: in this case, could you defend yourself from a feeling of dread of 
finding at your side a man who would have so many links by which one can seize him? As for the 
regency you want to leave at home in case of absence, I see that Simeon deserves all confidence for the 
administration; I suppose that the chief, or even the gendarmerie, Bongars, would remain in Westphalia; 
but there would still be a general of some distinction who would be inclined to lead the troops wherever 
it was necessary. 

You have eighteen battalions and eight squadrons online. You would need sixty pieces of 
cannon. The least possible would be forty-eight pieces, namely: twelve regimental pieces; two batteries 
on foot, each of six pieces of six and two howitzers, sixteen pieces; two horse batteries of four pieces of 
six and two howitzers, twelve pieces; a reserve battery of six pieces of 12 and two howitzers, eight 
pieces; total, forty-eight pieces. 

For the service of your thirty-six spare parts, you need 200 wagons, because you have to have 
400 shots per piece. These 200 wagons would require 1,000 horses: you only have 600, that is to say that 
you can only harness 120 wagons with your train. It would therefore be necessary that the other 80 
wagons were harnessed, at the time of the war, by a lifting of horses of requisition. Your thirty-six 
pieces of reserve would naturally march, that is, sixteen with the infantry, which will make twenty-eight 
with the twelve regimental pieces; the eight pieces of the spare battery with the guard; the twelve of two 
batteries on horseback, one with the guard, the other with the brigade of cuirassiers. 

This is the least organization you can have, and again'' 


15 


Page 116 


will you only have half the current organization of my troops, and less than the foreign troops. 

Your artillery companies on foot to serve eight pieces must be 120 men. The two companies on 
horseback and the six companies you see seem sufficient: three of them will serve the artillery divisions 
and three will be at the park. 

Eighteen battalions, representing 12,000 bayonets, must have sixty men's cartridges in the 
caissons, in addition to those of the cartridges. You would need 48 cartridge cases; you have 18 with the 
regiments, so there would be 30 left with the reserve. These 30 caissons would walk, namely: 18 with 
the infantry and 12 with the park or the Sardinian. But the infantry caissons enter the evaluation of the 
200 wagons. 

I go to the genie. It is not having an army that can not be entrenched. You have a company of 
sappers; it should be increased to at least 120 men. It would be necessary to have half a company of 
organized engineers as they are in France. This half-company would serve 25 cars carrying 3,000 
pioneer tools, ropes and other items needed to repair bridges and help pass a small river. 

FOOD. - To make war in the country where your army corps will serve, you need to have bread 
for fifteen days, carrying biscuit and flour. I suppose that your corps will rise to 18,000 mouths, for a 
fortnight it is the employment of 270,000 rations of flour or grain. By having big wagons each carrying 
four thousand, you would need 40 or 50 carriages. 

SHOES. - It is necessary that each man leaving Cassel has a pair of shoes on his feet, two pairs 
in the bag and a pair carried in wagons, so that a summer campaign can be done without the soldier 
comes to be barefoot. 

All preparations are made here as if the war were certain. I have in my crews 2,000 large model 
wagons carrying 4,000, and 4,000 artillery wagons hitched by 20,000 horses. My Guard alone has two 
hundred pieces of cannon harnessed, with 600 boxes of transport, etc. The French army has only eight 
hundred pieces of cannon. 

You will always be notified fifteen days in advance. Try to have your army equipped with 
everything, especially artillery and means of transport for food. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. Prince J erome.'’° 





116 


Page 117 


18378. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris. December 27, 1811. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I send you a report of a privateer. The same sounds come back on all 
sides. It seems proper to ask for positive explanations on this island (1). Ask my charge d'affaires to find 
out what that means. Let him know that if indeed Sweden allowed the English to settle on this island, it 
would be the equivalent of a break, and that in that case he would have to leave Stockholm with his 
legation at once. Say a word to the charge d'affaires of Sweden here. 

NAPOLEON. 

P. S. All this must be a report. Next Thursday you will present the letter to my charge d'affaires 
in Stockholm. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18379. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS 
Paris, December 27, 1811. 


Monsieur le Duke de Feltre, I can only disapprove the part taken by M. Lesseps to suspend a 
pension granted to unfortunates who have served France well. The pretexts he gives are unfounded. It is 
not his responsibility to suspend the execution of imperial decrees, unless there are reasons of the 
highest importance which can not be delayed. The court-martial has been perfectly entitled to award 
indemnities in its judgments, and I do not see what M. Lesseps is surprised at in this respect. (2) Write to 
him that he gives course to the sentence of the council of war, and that, without listening to vain 
considerations, he protects the friends of France. It is a defect too recognized on the part of the French 
administration 





1) Fotoe, in Goetborg Bay. 

2) An imperial decree of March 25, 1811 granted annuities to the family of Count Demetrio Macri, devoted to France, killed 
in a revolt in Paxo, one of the Ionian Islands. Some time afterwards the council of war, called upon to try the guilty parties, 
having, after the condemnations pronounced against them, ordered the payment of a sum of money to indemnify Count 
Mucri's family, M. de Lesseps thought it his duty to suspend the proceedings, execution of this measure, based on the fact 
that the Macri family was already receiving, as compensation, a pension from the French Government, ''” 





La} 


Page 118 


to abandon his friends always, listening to calumnies, and condemning too lightly to the slightest 
pretext. 
From the minute, Archives of the Empire. 


TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 27, 1811. 


Count Decres, you told me that the transport of wood from the forest of Compiegne to Antwerp 
would cost 3 francs. I send you a report from the forest captain of Compiegne, who estimates it only at 
the end of the year. It has already returned to me from many quarters that the prices agreed by the navy 
with the transport contractors are exaggerated, that these prices were made at a time when they were 
paying badly, and that the naval council can turn them down half by paying well: it would be a saving of 
2 millions. It is obvious that anything that is being paid today at the same price as it was paid six years 
ago must have a moderation of more than 30 to 40 per cent. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18381. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 27, 1811. 


My cousin, my intention is that the two battalions of Baden, which are at Dazing, be worn on the 
states as attached to the Ist division of the observation corps of the Elbe, that the two battalions of 
Hesse-Darmstadt should be worn as attached to the 4th division, and that the first two battalions of the 
127th were immediately attached to the 3rd division (of General Gudin). By this means, the first five 
divisions of your army corps will form eighty-seven battalions, and you will find yourself gaining line 
increase of six field pieces. Give orders accordingly. You have received the organization of the 6th, 8th 
and 9th divisions which consist, namely: 

The 6" division, four battalions of the 24th light, five battalions of the 19th line, five battalions 
of the 56th, two battalions of the 128th (first and third during the course of the year; first sixteen 
battalions); 

The 8th Division, four battalions of the 11th, four battalions!!® 





118 


Page 119 


the 2nd, four battalions of the 37th and three battalions of the 123rd; total, fifteen battalions; 

The 9th Division, of two crushed battalions, of eight Swiss battalions first and four others later, 
which will make twelve, of three battalions of the 123rd; total, thirteen battalions first, and later 
seventeen. 

Let me know if the 3rd, 4th and 5th battalions of the 127th and 128th are formed. Do you not 
think it right, after extracting the men available for the first two battalions, to send these cadres to the 
25th military division, so that the conscripts who are to be lifted pass without delay the Rhine and come 
to join these battalions in France? 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18382. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris, December 27, 1811. 


My Son, I refer you your draft decree of September 9, on the currencies, of all the questions, if 
that of the wheat is the most important, that of the currencies holds the second rank. Nothing is more 
likely to stir the spirits and to give substance to slander and popular riots, I do not believe that the 
current moment is that of touching these questions, which interest especially the poorest classes of the 
population; wheat is too expensive for that. It is necessary to postpone this and, in the meanwhile, to 
study the matter. No doubt that reductions are soon ordered and soon made, but the people, whose 
operations diminish their fortune, retain a long agitation: even in France, what I made last year stirred a 
lot for several months. We must continue to walk as we did until this time, waiting for other 
circumstances. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S, A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18383, TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 28, 1811. 


Count Mollien, I read with interest your reports of the 5th and 27th of November on the finances 
of the Illyrian provinces. 

Report says November 5, 1811. - I see that you carry 6,050,000 francs as due on the years 1809 
and 1810; But!!” 





119 


Page 120 


a large part of this debt is illusory. How, indeed, can one believe that for 1809 the Minister of War still 
owes 991,740 francs? that the administration of the war still owes 105,000 francs? Already I see that 
there is a sum of 500,000 francs to be deducted from the debt. I find it hard to believe that the Minister 
of War owes 840,000 francs in 1810; that the Minister of the Administration of War owes 1 million in 
this exercise, and the Minister of the Interior 300,000 francs. Give me some explanation on that. It 
would be necessary also to have information on the 500,000 francs which are brought as interest of the 
capital at the expense of Illyria. 

Report of November 27th. - Illyria is entered in the budget of 1811 for 10 millions, but in 
expenditure it is carried only to the account of each ministry. The budget of April 15th was only an 
overview; it must no longer serve as a base, the expenses of Illyria being confused with those of the 
Empire. In fact, in the budget of the great judge, Chapter VHI, I have granted this minister 410,000 
francs for the service of his department in the Illyrian provinces, and these 410,000 francs are part of the 
27,460,000 francs which compose the budget of the great judge. In the budget of the Ministry of the 
Interior, Chapter X, I have granted 400,000 francs for Illyria; I also find in chapter X extraordinary 
funds of the same ministry 600,000 francs for the work of the bridges and roads in Illyria: what forms 
the million granted to the minister of the interior for these provinces and which is understood in total of 
43 million forming the budget of the interior. I see in Chapter VI of the budget of the Ministry of 
Finance that I have granted 500,000 francs for the service of finance; in Illyria. I see in chapter V of the 
budget of the treasury that I have granted 200,000 francs for the same destination. Illyria is carried for 
760,000 francs in the budget of the Ministry of the Navy, and since then, by my decree of August 16th, 
this article has been raised to 1,100,000 francs. Chapter IX of the budget of the Ministry of War grants 
2,400,000 francs for the Croatian regiments employed in the Illyrian provinces. Chapter VII of the 
budget of the Ministry of Cults grants 300,000 francs. Finally, I see in chapter VI of the police budget 
that the police costs in Illyria are charged for 100,000 francs. 

It follows from these provisions that Illyria has no special budget; that from then on there can be 
no deficit, no gain, no loss; that this is a bad expression used in your report, and that there is no need for 
my intervention to serve these provinces, nor for the service of the government beyond’”° 





120 


Page 121 


Alps; that finally the accounts of the intendant are only cash accounts, and that it is up to him to provide 
for expenses on the orders of the ministers. 

I am currently on the account of Intendant Chabrol. This account is in all fault and made 
according to the worst accounting principles. The recipe is a real budget, since it is not confused with the 
various contributions of the Empire: it is a separate recipe article for 10 million francs in the general 
budget. Of these 10 million, 7,500,000 francs were recovered on October Ist. 

But the sum of 2,480,000 francs, which follows in the state, is absurd and can only give rise to 
false figures. It can not be concluded that the military Croatia, which is to pay back 800,000 francs, has 
returned only 235,000 in the first nine months, that it can only pay back 117,000 out of the remainder to 
be recovered. The same calculation can not be applied either to salts or to tobacco, so that I regard all 
these results as faulty, and everything leads me to think that instead of 10 millions the receipts will be 12 
millions. I do not know what the intendant means by relief sent from the Imperial treasury, since even 
the 10 millions belong to the imperial treasury. Regardless of these receipts, there should be special 
receipts, such as the extra cents that are not brought into the state budget, and here I do not see them. 
However, the decree of April 15th is positive; it carries that it will be perceived 2 cents of non-values; 
Now these 2 cents of nonvalues must return to the treasury like the other recipes. I do not see what 
causes the intendant to bear the expenses of the war at 7,880,000, those of the administration of the war 
at 3,525,000, those of the navy at 1,352,000 francs. Who told him, finally, that the sums to be paid will 
amount to 16,257,000 francs? I do not understand that. Payments in Illyria are the amounts to be ordered 
by the ministers. It is not possible that the administration of war orders for 3,500,000 francs in a country 
where there are only six battalions; that Switzerland orders 2,400,000 francs and for Croats on the other 
hand 5,400,000 francs 5,400,000. Once again, there are only six battalions in this country. Consequently, 
all this system of the Illyrian provinces seems to me to be improbable and badly thought out. Only you 
must know every month what you have to pay in Illyria, since every month you are aware of the orders 
of ministers. What I see clearly is that on the 1st of October there was a receipt of 7,500,000 francs, 
which makes a total of 7,800,000 f'7" 





121 


Page 122 


you had sent 3,500,000 francs there, which makes it millions; that the expense amounted to 7,500,000 
francs, of which 3,700,000 francs for the war 2,111,000 francs for the administration of the war and 
450,000 francs for the navy; that it remains in cash 3,500,000 francs, that you still have to recover 
3,500,000 francs, and that consequently your resources are of more than 7 million. You must know at 
present what the Ministers of War, the Administration of War, and the Navy have quoted for payment in 
October, November, and December, since you have seen their ordinances; so you have proof that it does 
not take 7 millions to finish the service, and that the column remaining to pay, of which the intendant 
brings the total to 8,700,000 francs, is absurd. I will not say Ilyria's estimates, this word is unsuitable, 
but the list of the ordinances of the ministers for 1811 must not exceed the following sums; know: 

Service of the Grand Judge, 1.00,000 francs; inside, 1 million; finances, 500,000; treasure, 
200,000; war, on the one hand 2,400,000, the other 3 million; total 3,400,000 francs; war administration, 
2,500,000; marine, 1,100,000; cults, 300,000; police, 100,000; total expenditure, 11,500,000 francs. 

On this expense of 11,500,000 francs, you paid 7,500,000 francs; it must therefore remain to pay 
only 4 million. But you have, both in cash and in recovery, an advance of 7 million, exceeding revenue, 
3,000,000. You see, then, that if you had not sent money, the service would have been done; it would 
have been a little short, but it would have been liquidated. Thus the receipts will be from 11 to 12 
millions; but the expenses will not exceed that sum, or at most there will be a difference of little value 
between the revenue made and the expenditure made; and, as one must understand in the means of doing 
this service the receipts of the posts and customs, I am justified in thinking that you will have received in 
1811 more money in Illyria than you will spend. In fact, to the 11,500,000 francs of which I spoke, it is 
necessary to join at least 1,500,000 francs posts and customs, which makes 13 million. But the expense 
can not rise to that. For the rest, the year is over, and you already know the expense that has been made, 
since you know the orders that have been sent. I desire, therefore, 1* that you write to the steward to 
rectify his ideas; 2™ that you deny an exact contribution on the situation of the expense made in Illyria. I 
do not need to ask if all the expenses made by the ministers in Illyria were charged to their account at!”* 


122 


Page 123 


budget, since I do not doubt it, and that once again Illyria, for its expenses, belongs only to the particular 
account of each ministry. 
If you needed, to follow this work, statements and other documents you gave me, you would ask 
the Minister of Finance, which I charge a final work on revenue, since it concerns him especially. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18384. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. December 28, 1811. 


My Son, I receive your situation of the 13th, 14th and 15th divisions. Please send me the same 
condition in more detail. How is it that you asked me until February 10 for the meeting of the troops? 
Having calculated that I will send you the order on the 2nd of January, you must have expected that you 
would receive it on the 8th; so you could run it on the 10th. How does it take a month for this 
movement? I prefer that you prepare well in your cantonments; it is possible that I send you orders by 
January Ist. 

Send me in detail the organization of your artillery; I can see a sufficient number of pieces, but I 
do not see the caissons or the horses. The Royal Guard has three regimental artillery companies; they 
should therefore serve eighteen pieces of regiment; however, I only see six of them in your condition. Of 
your one hundred and twenty-four pieces, you have thirty-four of regiment; so you have only ninety of a 
line. To serve these ninety pieces it takes 5 to 600 wagons, that is to say 3,000 horses. The 7th main 
battalion of the French train has about 1,500 horses; you must have 1,500 Italians. 

I do not see any pontooners, I see that the company of the engineer train is not organized. 

You must be careful not to take men or horses from the 9th Transport Battalion; I need this battalion 
more than artillery: bread goes first and foremost. 

The sapper companies are very weak. The Ist Company of the 7th Battalion is only 70 men; it 
must be completed to 140 men. The one you attach to the 14th Division has only 80 men. The Italian 
artillery companies must be completed'”” 





123 


Page 124 


120 men, horse artillery companies with 100 men, and sapper companies with 140 men. The fourth 
company of Italian sappers has only 80 men. 

You do not tell me if the cavalry regiments have their field forge. 

Two companies of French artillery on foot are not sufficient to the big park, it would be 
necessary four. I do not see that you put in the big park of Italian artillery companies; it would take two. 
Finally, I repeat, I do not see any pontonniers. 

I see, in your condition, 670 horses of the Italian train and 250 horses of military equipments; 
that is very little; you would need at least 2,000 artillery to get your park. I suppose that each box of 
tools attached to the sappers is hitched. 

The Minister of the Administration of War writes to you to equip the two Croatian battalions and 
to make it entirely your business; make sure they are ready by February Ist. I think it would be 
appropriate for you to crack them; come to Brescia, where you would be more the master. 

Let me know where the conscription is, so that I can see in what situation I leave Italy. 

We must leave Gerard to the light cavalry, this is his job. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18385. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, IN MILAN 
Paris, December 28, 1811. 


My son, the 16,000 Italians who are in the army corps, in the country where the war they are 
called to make, can not serve if they do not carry with them thirty days of food. Each regiment must 
have an ambulance caisson. Having the value of eight regiments, you must have 8 ambulance caissons; 
but that will not be enough; it will take 8 military transport caissons for the ambulances of the guard, the 
infantry and the cavalry brigade. Each battalion must have its military transport caisson. These caissons 
carry scarcely 1,000 rations or food for a day; it would take 29 times as much; but instead of military 
caissons, it is necessary to have caissons of new model carrying 4,000 pounds or 40 quintals. The army 
corps being 16,000 rations, 4 of these caissons would carry the subsistence of the army for one day; for 
thirty days it would be 120 caissons. He’™ 


124 


Page 125 


would then be necessary to form a battalion of Italian military crews of four companies, each company 
of 42 wagons, total 168 wagons. The Ist company will have military caissons of old model, so that with 
the caissons of the battalions it can make the service of bread, from the shop to the camp; this company 
will also supply 8 caissons for ambulances. The other three companies will have new model wagons 
bearing 4,000 rations of flour and wheat. By this means, food for thirty days will be provided to the 
guard and the Italian army. I believe the Placentia depot can provide the military transport boxes you 
need. In Italy and North can be built new model wagons. The horses and harnesses would be bought as 
soon as you set in motion. Make me a report that will let me know what you have, what you are missing 
for this organization and how much it will cost. 

The 9th Battalion of the Military Crews can not be employed entirely for the French Army; some 
companies could be ceded to the Italian divisions. 

NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18386. - TO THE GENERAL LAKE, COUNT OF CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 29, 1811. 


I wrote to you yesterday for Barcelona; I had the idea of sending in the 120 wagons I have, 
although they are very necessary for the army of Portugal. I do not give up on this idea, but it must be 
admitted that these cars will soon be lost, and that, moreover, without any restraint, it becomes a very 
expensive operation. On the other hand, sending wine, rice and dried vegetables, meat, by cabotage suits 
me perfectly; but the sending of corn and flours by this means is extremely harmful to me: the harvest 
being bad in France, every building I lose can no longer be evaluated by money, but by the real loss of 
grain, which supply the enemy, who has the greatest need for Cadiz and Lisbon. That being the case, I 
have 18,000 metric quintals of wheat already bought to pass to Barcelona: this would be the supply of 
this important place for a year. In the present situation of our crops, this employment would be 
imprudent; I will therefore content myself with sending 10,000 quintals of pomace, if it were more 
advantageous, in flours:!*° 





125 


Page 126 


it would be a supply of two hundred days or seven months. Supply being assured until April, these seven 
months would lead me until the end of October: that would remove us from all anguish for this 
important object, These same quintals, I do not want to transport them by sea: would lose half of it; I 
want them to be carried on the ground in five convoys, each of 100 wagons: Ist, January 15th; the 2nd, 
February 20th; 3rd, March 20th; the 4th, April 20th; the 5th, May 20th. I suppose eight days to go, eight 
days to return, six to stay; there would be another eight days to repair the wagons and prepare for the 
second convoy. 

I would like this transport not to be done at my expense; but that a house of commerce, like the 
house Durand or any other of this kind, undertook to provide 100 wagons with 6 horses with 2 or 3 men 
to Perpignan. You will supply by convoy 4,000 quintals of flour, which he would be required to carry to 
Barcelona and under the escort of the army. It would charge back sugar, coffee, indigo, colon and wool, 
etc. These commodities would be brought to Perpignan; it should be noted: 1‘ the number of the cart; 
2™ the weight equal to wheat worn; a customs employee would accompany from Barcelona to 
Perpignan. Thus, 100 wagons would bring 400,000 francs of sugar, coffee, or cotton, the house would 
have the privilege of introducing these commodities without a certificate of origin, and would pay 
customs customarily. You will calculate what would be his gain: this calculation will be easy to do. 
Comparing the price of sugar in Barcelona with that of France, I estimate it at | million per trip or 
10,000 francs per wagons; for five trips, it would be 5 million gain for this house. 

Assuming the wagon worth the 6 horses of the maintenance for five months to a total of 12,000 
francs per wagon, I will always have the result, for every 100 wagons, of 1,200,000 francs; but 
nevertheless the gain would remain of 3,800,000 francs. It is true that I have brought into France 2 
millions of pounds of cotton, of sugar, 1 coffee, but also I will have obtained a great advantage; for I 
observe that, by the tariff of August 5th, the pound of colonist of Brazil pays 4 francs of rights: a wagon 
which would carry 4,000 pounds will therefore pay on its return to Perpignan only 16,000 francs. 

If it's sugar, the pound pays 30 cents; the 4,000 pounds would therefore pay me 6,000 francs. If 
it's coffee, the pound pays 40 cents; the 4,000 pounds would thus pay me 8,000 francs. If it's indigo, the 
pound pays 4 francs 10 cents. If it's cocoa, the pound pays 5 francs, etc, !7° 


126 


Page 127 


You see, therefore, that with this privilege, I have enough to do all that is right, without spending 
anything, and granting one-third and one-quarter of the freeing of duties and assuming the loading of the 
100 wagons, that is, to say 4,000 quintals: 1,000 in sugar, 1,000 in cotton, 1,000 in coffee, 1,000 in 
indigo or other commodities. 

Sugar will make 150,000 francs, cotton 800,000, coffee 200,000, indigo 1 million; total, 
2,150,000 francs: five journeys will make 10,750,000 francs. 

I think that traders will earn enough when they have the advantage of not being required to have 
certificates of origin, and they will submit to pay all my rights net. The hides of Buenos Ayres, etc., the 
cottons Motril will be part of the returns. 

See tomorrow morning the people who can give you positive information on this matter; you will 
give me an account after mass. 

I do not know of any effective and simpler means of supplying Barcelona. I count on your 
wisdom to make the company the greatest benefits, however, losing as little as possible. Of course if the 
link of 100 wagons the company wanted to provide 2 or 300, it would be accepted, so instead of five 
trips, we would only do two or three. 

Once the above principles have been laid down for Barcelona, I have no problem in establishing 
them for all the rest of Spain. For this purpose, all the transport of clothing and artillery effects from 
Bayonne to Madrid, from Bayonne to Seville, from Bayonne to Zaragoza and Valencia, would be 
established on the same principle. A convoy would leave every month, escorted by 500 men; it would be 
100 or 200 wagons and would go to Burgos, part of Valladolid, part of Madrid, part of Seville. It would 
be granted the privilege for the convoy of Burgos; this is more considerable for that of Seville; the same 
principle for that of Valencia; by this means, clothing, the very effects and ammunition of artillery 
would be transported in quantity without cost. 

It is necessary to calculate the needs of clothing per year for Burgos, Valladolid and Seville. For 
Seville, it takes two months of road and so much return; the convoy of Seville can only make three trips 
a year. Assuming 100 cars, that would be 300 wagon goods returning to France; 300 garment wagons 
are not needed, but we would transport war ammunition, we would reduce the convoys to 50 wagons, or 
we would only'”’ 


127 


Page 128 


two trips to 100 wagons a year. The convoys of Madrid, four a year to 25 wagons, 100 wagons; the 
convoys of Burgos and Valladolid, ten convoys a year to 15 wagons, 150 wagons; the convoys of 
Valencia, to two a year to 50 wagons, 100 wagons. That would be about 500 wagons that would carry 
20,000 quintals or 2 million weight; which I suppose is more than enough to carry clothing, linen and 
shoes for 300,000 men. They would introduce the same quantity of goods as the Catalan expedition; but 
here we could restrict ourselves to wool, Motril cotton, and other objects of the Spanish product; 
however, a proportion could be established for colonial commodities, if necessary. 

Having thus applied these ideas to my needs in Spain, I wish to use them for my needs on the 
Vistula. 

The transports from Magdeburg to the Vistula are by water; it is therefore a question of dealing 
only with those of Magdeburg in France. I want to have 28 million bottles of wine, 2 million bottles of 
brandy; a total of 30 millions of liquid, forming 60,000 rations of wine for 300,000 men for two hundred 
days, and 32,000 rations of brandy for 300,000 men for a hundred and thirty days; which would water 
an entire army for a year. I wish it only cost me redemption at Bordeaux; 28 million bottles of wine 
make up about 12,000 barrels of wine, which, at 60 francs, cost 720,000 francs in Bordeaux, 12,000 
barrels would represent 6 million pounds and would require 1,300 wagons; from Bordeaux to 
Magdeburg this should cost a sum to be calculated. I will grant the right to bring back from Magdeburg 
cottons, sugar, and coffee, by paying to the custom-house, and establishing a rule which should be 
sought. I wanted to sink the idea, but the important thing now is to take care of Barcelona. 


P.S. When I realized the operation on Barcelona, I made the following calculations: a roll-on 
wagon carrying 5,000 pounds must be worth 2,000 francs; 6 horses must be worth 6,000 francs; total, 
8,000 francs. So I estimate the first bet of a wagon at 8,000 francs; I believe this assessment 
exaggerated, the minister will put the real price. Three men are needed; for the engagement of the three 
men, for their equipment and for their clothing, I put 600 francs at 200 francs one; total approximately 
9,000 francs; I believe this price exaggerated. I suppose the maintenance of the horses, per day, at 2 
francs per horse, 12 francs, and at 3 francs per man, 9 francs; !78 





128 


Page 129 


that's 21 francs a day; 21 francs multiplied by 365 days are 7,665 francs. I put for the value of the car, 
first setting, 9,000 francs; food for horses and men for one year, 7,665 francs; total, 16,665; but, as I 
suppose that the carriage and the horses will last three years, the first year must be taken into account 
only 3,000 francs for the first time and for food 7,665 francs; total, 10,665 francs. 

By neglecting the 665 francs, I will have 10,000 francs carrying 40 quintals; assuming twelve 
trips, they will carry 480 quintals; thus 10,000 francs divided by 480 quintals will make about 21 francs 
the quintal in expenses; it would be enough, then, to obtain a profit of 4 to 5 sous per pound, or 25 francs 
per quintal, or 1,000 francs per car, so that the individual who would have the certainty of a year's 
journey would be out of business. The privilege of importing sugar, coffee and cotton, without paying to 
the Customs, without a certificate of origin, can not be valued at less than 10 sous per pound; if it was 
cotton, probably it would go to 40 cents. Thus, without losing any of the customs duty, this simple 
privilege can be assessed at that. 

It seems that the cost of transport from Bordeaux to Magdeburg must be estimated at 60 francs, 
which is 12 cents a pound. Thus, by giving a privilege of customs which assures the return a profit of 10 
or 12 under the pound, the individuals must be found. The privilege of receiving sugar, coffee, cotton 
taken at Magdeburg and transported to France, paying the duties and without a certificate of origin, is 
equivalent to more than that. 

All this detail being dictated by me and from memory, it is possible that there are big mistakes. 
We must check everything and adopt on this say no assertion, not even the eight days of Perpignan in 
Barcelona, Check the steps (1). 

According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18387. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. December 29, 1811. 


Count Decres, I send you an acknowledgment of the port of Barcelona; you will see that 
chimeras are formed; that the pass is only 200 yards from the batteries, and that, 20 fathoms forward, 
one can anchor by 20 feet of water; that one can approach from Monjuich up to 150 toises by 16 and 17 
feet of water. Our barges 





(1) This last paragraph is written the hand of the Emperor.'” 


129 


Page 130 


800 tons, loaded to 15 feet of pulling, can come close to the batteries, lighten 2 feet to pass the bar, or 
double this bar to shelter under Monjuich. Your data on the port of Tarragona are even more flawed. It is 
a fact that during the siege, the English ships overtook the pier and approached a quarter of range to fire 
our redoubts. Harbor probes report 24 feet; the frigates are safe. I think that the Barcelona operation has 
not the difficulties that we imagine; still less that of Tarragona. 
Napoleon. 
From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18388. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 29, 1811. 


I would need 300 wagons for military transport; they are four-wheeled wagons, vans, as you may 
have seen; they cost 1,200 francs. I would like them on the 30th of February. The workshops of the land 
at Sampigny are furnished with old model wagons and can only make 50 new models a month; I am 
therefore obliged to resort to the workshops of different cities; which has all sorts of disadvantages. I 
wish you to see if you could not have me built, by February, 2 to 300 of these wagons in the Antwerp 
arsenal; these wagons are pretty much what the artillery officers call prolonged; so your artillery office 
will know exactly what it is. The piles of wood that exist in Antwerp and the large number of workers, 
the abundance of iron and all that goes into this construction, make me think, without being sure, that 
you can provide me with these 300 wagons. I think you can also provide me 100 in Venice. The same 
reasoning that allows this construction in Antwerp, or opposes it, applies to Venice. Bring me your 
report at the time of the Mass. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18389.-TO THE MOLLIEN COUNTY, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 29, 1811, 


Count Mollien, I want to take another million!*° 


130 


Page 131 


in the loan of Saxony; have this million paid to Magdeburg or Danzig. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18390.-TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 29, 1811. 


Count Mollien, it is necessary to send to Barcelona | million: 300,000 francs will be the balance 
of 1811 and 500,000 francs for purchases of wheat, meat, vegetables, and for the bakery. This article 
will be in the account of the administration of the war. You will send 400,000 francs in silver and 
600,000 francs in treasury notes. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18391. - DECISION. 
Paris, December 29, 1811. 








The Minister of War submits to the The Prince of Eckmiihl will make no 
Emperor, a request from the Prince Royal of reply, if he presses him he will reply that he 
Sweden, for permission to send to Rostock a has no orders and that he has written. 


Swedish battery, charged to learn the various 
batteries in use among the French troops. 











NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18392. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, IN MALAN. 
Paris, December 29, 1811. 


My Son, I have a considerable convoy in Trieste, destined for Corfu. The event which has 
arrived at La Corcyre, which I think is taken, makes us fear that it will be difficult to send this convoy. 
Would it be difficult for this convoy to travel from Trieste to Ancona, where he would find /'Uranie, la 
Princesse-de-Bologne, who, with the la Danaé, would make three frigates? 

I have at Venice three vessels which are useless; why are they not at Malamocco, to seize the 
moment of passing to Ancona? They would then force the English to hold three ships in front of 
Ancona, or we would be masters of the Adriatic. You no longer speak to me of the navy; however, it 
becomes more important than ever. 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I., the Duchess of Leuchtenberg,'*' 





ales glk 


Page 132 


18393. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. December 29, 1811. 


My Son, I take care of bringing together at Magdeburg a great quantity of brandy. I would like 
you to buy and transport 1,500 barrels to Verona; each barrel contains 240 pints, and each pint gives 16 
rations. Each barrel weighs about 100 Ibs: it could be loaded on every wagon of the 9th battalion of 
military crews 5 barrels that it would take in passing to Verona; which makes 1,200. The Italian train 
could take some too. The spirits arrived at Dresden or Magdeburg would be transported on the Vistula to 
the existing canals. These brandy would be a great resource. Let me know if the brandy of Italy are as 
good as those of Cognac, what is the price, how much we could get, in what part of Italy we could make 
purchases, and how much they would return to Verona and Bolzano. 

A large amount of colonial goods arrive in Milan: what do these wagon carry back? Call the 
French customs agent. Could not we bring brandies on these wagon? What would be the total number of 
these wagon? 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18394. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris; December 30, 1811. 


The Duke of Bassano, write to my minister in Frankfurt for the setting up of the Prince Primate's 
contingent. Ask him what this contingent will be and when he is ready. It is necessary also to demand 
the 1,100 men who are due for the first brigade by the college of princes. Ask the Grand Duke of 
Wiirzburg and the Ducal Houses of Saxony for the 2nd Brigade, and the 3rd Brigade for the Princes of 
Schwarzburg, Anhalt, Lippe, Reuss and Waldeck, for I would like to have these six regiments in the 


current from February. 


NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. '* 





132 


Page 133 


18395. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 30, 1811. 


The chief engineer of the department of Lozere is bad; he is old; it must be changed. We think 
that we must also change the engineer second. The whipper is a lawyer who is more involved in 
advocating than work. The prefect of Lozére is bad. 

Give me a report on the prisons, the roads, the begging depots, of which we complain. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18396. - NOTE 
DICTATED TO THE TRADE AND MANUFACTURING COUNCIL. 
Palace of St. Cloud, December 30, 1811. 


The Minister of the Interior, up to this hour, has always maintained that establishments would 
not fail; the opinion was that they would be wanting, and that one could only make beets. It was 
therefore of the greatest importance that there were many establishments, otherwise the farmers would 
be disgusted, since, in the absence of these establishments, it was to take a step backward and to expose 
itself to the fact that the farmer who did not find the flow of the sugar beet no longer sowing it next year. 

It is extraordinary that in this report we talk about budgets. The fund made available to the 
minister has not been spent; if it had been, and the minister had made another request, his Majesty 
would not have refused ten millions. 

The Minister of the Interior will make a new report, to which he will attach the account of the 
funds employed, and explain why he has not made a new request. 

The Minister concludes that there are no measures to be taken: however, if new establishments 
are not formed, the culture will be downgraded, or at least will be established only over the years. The 
question must be taken in the opposite direction, and as many manufactures as are necessary to make 
beet harvested this year, and in such numbers everywhere that the formation of these establishments 
encourages the farmer to sow. Nor can it be known from the report how much France loses by the 
insufficiency of these establishments. !*° 





133 


Page 134 


To be printed in the Moniteur, this report must only say what has actually been sown, make 
known in note the reasons which prevented the sowing, make known in another column what one has 
manufactured. The general report and the report for Moniteur will be presented next Monday. 

1,200 acres planted with sugar beet would each make 300 quintals of sugar beet and 600 pounds 
of sugar, which would have been 7,200,000 pounds; instead we had only 2,790,000 pounds. Thus the 
lack of means of manufacture has caused the farmers to lose 4,410,000 pounds of sugar, and must 
necessarily have caused them a loss for having indulged in this crop; they have been fooled by their 
confidence in the government. 

Count Chaptal will carry on Monday a detailed brief on manufacturing. This memoir should be 
accompanied by plans, and make known what is a beet factory, how much it would take to make all the 
beets harvested in 1811, how much would be needed for what will be harvested in 1812. Conclusion will 
be a distribution project to order the formation of institutions in 1812; and wherever there is a crop, a 
quantity of factories proportionate to the sowing will be placed at the expense of the Government. 

The 7,200,000 pounds of sugar that one could have had this year would have required 200 
factories like that of the Sieur Fay in the department of Doubs. After all, they would have cost, at the 
rate of 12,000 francs one, only 2,400,000 francs. With the sum of a million which his Majesty has 
granted, it would have been possible to establish a hundred, and it appears that only two or three have 
been established. 

The Minister of the Interior will examine, as well as M. Chaptal for his part, if it would not be 
advisable to set up beet factories as an exclusive privilege. Government alone can safely engage in an 
operation of this nature. How would an individual expose considerable funds to speculation that can be 
destroyed by a treaty of commerce or a change in the customs tariff? For it is proved that beet sugar will 
always cost double or triple the original price of cane sugar. 

On the other hand, if beet sugar sells like cane sugar, is it not a great harm to the treasure, which 
loses the right of entry, and yet by this right of entry keep up the price? Thus, on the one hand, the 
people are obliged to pay dear sugar, on the other the profit is not in the treasure; which is always 
contrary 


134 


Page 135 


on the principle that all the sacrifices that the people endure must be for the treasure. 

After considering this measure from the point of view of finance, it must be examined from the 
political point of view. France may one day want to return to cane sugar; and then, will not we have 
given rise to the complaints of those who have raised manufactures on the word of the government? 
Instead that the government, having made the sacrifice of only a few millions, will be repaid in a few 
years, and will be able to calculate the advantage of the return to the system of colonies. It appears that 
until now there are few established factories: they would be bought by the government. It also appears 
that it would take only 5 or 6 millions to establish the manufacture: the government alone can give this 
result; it is not probable that in many years the trade can make these establishments. 

The problem is to arrive in 1813, to prohibit cane sugar, to bear a large price decrease to the 
consumer and yet have a good product for the treasure. 

The Minister of Finance will also make a memorandum on this subject. 

According to the copy. Archives of Agriculture, Commerce and Public Works. 


18397. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTHE, 
MINISTER: OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 30, 1811. 


Pontonniers. - The corps of the pontonniers of the Grande Armée will have thirteen companies, 
namely: seven companies of the Ist battalion (this battalion has four companies in Spain) and six 
companies of the 2nd battalion. The 3rd company, which is at the Bayonne reserve, will be ordered to go 
to Metz. What these two battalions have available at the depot will be sent to recruit the thirteen 
companies. 

Thus there will be: a company of pontooners in the corps of the Elbe, a company with the corps 
of the Ocean, a company with the observation corps of Italy, a company with the Guard and nine 
companies with a large park of the bridges ( three per crew, or divided as circumstances would like). 

All the companies of the 2nd battalion which are in Italy will follow the movement of the 
observation corps of Italy; those in Germany will follow the movement of the observation corps of the 
Elbe and the crews of the bridge. 

SAPPERS. - The sappers will be distributed as follows:'*° 


135 


Page 136 


the 1st battalion has two companies in Spain and seven in Italy: these seven companies will be 
employed at the Grande Armée. The 3rd Battalion, which is in Alexandria, has eight companies present 
and one in Corfu. The 5th battalion, which is in Metz, has its nine companies present. So there will be to 
the Grande Armée, namely: Ist battalion, seven companies; 3rd battalion, eight companies; 5th 
battalion, nine companies; total, twenty-four companies. 

All that deposits have available will be incorporated into these twenty-four companies. 

The depot of the 4th battalion, which is at Metz, will be used to carry the companies of the 5th 
battalion in full. 

Have a report on the battalion that is on the island of Elbe, to see what this battalion can provide 
to complete the Ist battalion. To have the same report on the companies of sappers of Belle-Ile and 
Walcheren, to know if one could take four companies; which would take the twenty-four companies to 
twenty-eight. 

Fourteen companies are needed for the fourteen divisions, and three for the Guard; so there will 
only be seven left in the Engineering Park. 

Of the twenty companies that are in Spain, I should be presented with a project to bring in the 
executives of six companies. 

MINERS. - I have twelve companies of miners. The Ist Company of the Ist Battalion is in 
Corfu; the 2nd company is in Badajoz; 3rd and 6th will be part of the Grande Armée; the fourth 
company must be brought from Spain and sent to Metz; we must remember the 5th company, which is 
at Bayonne; By this means, I will have four companies of miners at the Grande Armée. The 2nd 
battalion it three companies in Spain and a company in Corfu; so there are only two companies left, the 
1st and the 5th Six companies of miners will therefore march with the engineering park. They must be 
completed to 120 or 140 men. I have already ordered the return of the 6th Company of the engineer's 
train, which is at Bayonne. I shall have six companies of the engineer's train; it is necessary to employ 
the depot of this battalion to carry these six companies in full force. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18398. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, IN PARIS, 
Paris, December 30, 1811, 


Cousin, prepare the following instructions which I wish to send to Marshal Suchet, as soon as I 
have approved your despatches. '*° 


136 


Page 137 


You will tell him that, immediately after the taking of Valencia, it is my intention that the 
generals, officers of the Polish general staff, as well as the Ist, 2nd and 3rd regiments of the Vistula, 
return to France. 

You will know which is the shortest route for the return of these three regiments. The 
government of Valencia will remain with Marshal Suchet with the command of the 3rd corps of the 
Army of Spain, which will be organized in the following manner: 114th, 121st, 7th, 116th, 44th, 16th, 
117th of line and 5th light; total, eight regiments. As soon as I know that Valencia is taken, I will order 
the provisional regiment of Aragon, which is at Pamplona, to go to Valencia to be incorporated into the 
eight regiments and complete them. You will inform me what the number, the number of men in the 
hospitals, and the presents under the arms of these eight regiments will be, supposing the provisional 
regiment incorporated. These eight regiments will be divided into three divisions, adopting the 
combination which will appear most suitable. All detachments that are in Aragon will join these 
regiments. The cavalry will consist of the 4th hussars and the 13th cuirassiers. 

My intention is that you ordered Marshal Suchet to send me all the companies of the artillery 
train, all those of the military crews, all the companies of miners, sappers and artillery which are useless. 
For this purpose, you will give me the state in the greatest detail, and you will propose to me the 
incorporation of the men necessary to complete those of these companies which will remain with the 
army of Valence. The executives of the train will consist of all the men on foot who do not have horses. 
The executives of sappers, miners and pontonniers will consist of NCOs and corporals, and 20 soldiers 
at the captain's choice, so that each company will come back strong to me at least 30 men, so that it can 
give the spirit and the movement to the conscripts that I will place there. 

I suppose that the need to occupy several strong points and defend the coasts will make Marshal 
Suchet necessary for the parts of the personnel composing the siege crew. 

The army corps of Marshal Suchet would thus be composed of 20 to 22,000 men. He will keep 
the Neapolitan division, 1,200 strong. 

The division Palombini, which is strong with 5 to 6,000 men and 400 men of cavalry, the 
division Severoli, strong of 5,000 men and 400 horses, which would make 11,000 men of Italian 
infantry and 800 horses, with the artillery which attached to them, and the'*” 





137 


Page 138 


Reille's division, with 9,000 men and 600 horses, will form an army corps of 20 to 21,000 men and 
1,500 horses. This division will go to Tortosa and take command of the Lower Catalog. 

You will then organize the artillery of these three divisions. It will be necessary to take some 
artillery companies and some artillery officers of the army of Aragon, in order to organize the park. 

You will make a territorial division of Catalonia in two divisions: one will include Torlosa, 
Mequinenza, Lerida, Tarragona, Mont-Serrat and Barcelona, placing the limit near Barcelona. You will 
consult to this effect General Guillemiuot, who was on the scene. 

General Reille will be able to take his headquarters to Tarragona, Lerida or Barcelona. His army 
will be augmented by the garrison of Barcelona, Tarragona, and Lerida, except for the detachments 
which would form part of the garrison of Girona or of the army of Valencia, as I have just described it. 

It will be necessary for you to see the minister of war to have all the details of the army of 
Catalonia and the garrisons of the different places, so that in your work you proposed to me the 
organization of the army of Catalonia, which will receive all the detachments of the garrison of 
Barcelona which belong to him and will return all that belongs to the army of Valencia. 

The Caffurelli division will also be part of General Reille's corps; which will bring this corps 
d'armee to 30,000 men of infantry and more than 2,000 horses; he will be in charge of the defense of all 
Aragon. Major General Abbé will take command of the Caffarelli division. 

You will submit me a project of organization for all Catalonia, high and low, and its division into 
departments for its final organization. 

General Reille's army corps will bear the title of Army Corps of the Ebro. To maintain tranquility 
in the country, to supply Barcelona strongly, are the principal objects of General Reille. He will 
maintain communication with the army of Valencia, with that of Portugal at Valladolid, with that of the 
Center at Madrid, and protect Aragon. He will be instructed to have always one or two divisions placed 
so as to strongly support the year of Portugal, if the English made an offensive movement on Valladolid. 

General Dorsenue, with all my Guard, would return to France; General Caffarelli would take 
command of the Northern Army'”® 





138 


Page 139 


in Burgos; he would find himself in the 113th, 130th of line and 34th light. The 48th of the Vistula being 
Polish would return to France. Let me know in detail what would be the strength of the Army of the 
North. 

I also wish to make an exchange, send back to the Army of Portugal the four regiments of march, 
and bring a division of the army of Portugal to Burgos, so that the number of men will be compensated: 
the Army of the North is would then find strong enough and composed of good troops. 

You will write to the Duke of Dalmatia to send out without delay the three regiments of the 
Vistula, that of the Lancers of the Vistula, and all the officers of the Polish Staff. This weakening in the 
Army of the South is no consequence, and the order will be given to execute this movement within 
twenty-four hours after the receipt of your letter. 

You will hand me a project for the recruitment of cadres to withdraw from various armies, 
executives of artillery companies and train battalions, sappers or miners, to return. 

The three pack mule companies which exist at the 3rd, 4th and 13th battalions at Pan, will be 
destined for the Ebro Corps; consequently, they will go by Pau, under good escort, taking advantage of 
the escort which will lead the prisoners of Valencia to Zaragoza; By this means, General Reille will have 
600 packets, which will be of great use to him. As these three companies belong to three different 
battalions, you will order the general of the army of Portugal to agree with the general Reille for the 
exchange, so that a complete battalion is the army of Portugal and one to the corps of the Ebro. 

Finally, propose me to bring for the Grande Armée the engineering company which was at 
Bayonne, for the observation corps, a company of pontooners, one of miners and, I believe, two 
companies of artillery which were destined for the same corps. There will remain a considerable staff 
and equipment. My intention is to use the carriages, when I will know perfectly the organization of those 
who have the army of Portugal. The armed one, being in the presence of the English, needs a strong 
organization of this kind. If you have no situation, the aide-de-camp of the Duke of Ragusa, who is an 
artillery officer, may give it to you. 

I attach the greatest importance to the fact that the Army of Portugal has at least one hundred 
pieces of cannon harnessed, with the proper provisions, the Souham division must be twenty-two, the 
army of Portugal eighty, the Bonet division four or five; we 


139 


Page 140 


it would be one hundred and six. I think he needs it just as much, and that he needs his artillery to be 
well hitched and of a good caliber. As soon as I have the organization of the artillery of the army of 
Portugal, the corps of the Ebro, the army of Valencia and the observation corps, I will give a destination 
to the 1,000 horses of the train which I have in Toulouse. 

The reserve corps being thus dissolved, let me know the destination to give to each, either for the 
corps of the Ebro or for any other; do me a very detailed work on all this, with the states in support. The 
result of these measures will be to weaken the armies of Spain of the four regiments of the Vistula, 
forming eight battalions, of three Polish regiments, forming six battalions; total, seven regiments or 
fourteen battalions, which will form a division of a marvelous effect to the Grand Army. 

I ordered that the 40th and 34th return to France; you will repeat these orders. I will also have 
weakened the Spanish armies of the Polish lancers regiment, some Polish generals and officers of the 
Staff, and twenty-two battalions of the Guard; total, thirty-six battalions; but I have recently sent the 
Souham division, which has fourteen battalions, the Reille division, as well as the Caffarelli division, 
idem; total, forty-two battalions. Thus, instead of losing, the armies of Spain will find themselves 
winning. 

It is very necessary that you make known to the Duke of Dalmatia that as soon as the 34th and 
40th, as well as the three Polish regiments, are gone, the nine battalions of march, who are in the fifth 
government and who belong to his body army, will leave to join him. 

In sending to the Minister of War the state of the troops of Catalonia, I beg you to propose to 
tighten the cadres, and to return those who are fit to receive the conscription. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18399. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE COPRS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, December 30, 1811. 


My Cousin, I receive even letter of the 25th, by which you let me know that instead of providing 
600 horses in Diisseldorf the suppliers prefer to supply 800 to Miinster: this entails no inconvenience; 
detachments that had received orders from 





140 


Page 141 


movement on Diisseldorf will go to Miinster. I also approve the delivery of 1,000 horses to Hamburg, 
instead of 500. I order that 500 men on foot with their saddles be directed to Hamburg. You ask me for a 
decision before eight days: my letter of yesterday answers the question. Go ahead. You can, without 
needing permission, raise 6,000 light cavalry horses, if you find them. France is exhausted by horses. It 
is said that there are many in Jutland and Holstein; Make the purchases: we can not have too many, 
because I am determined to put my cavalry on the best foot. I will not regret one or two million for that. 
As it is my intention to send my light cavalry to Hanover, there is no objection to the fact that you are 
pushing deliveries to Hannover, Magdeburg and Hamburg up to 2,000 horses. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18400. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE COPRS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris. December 30, 1811. 


Cousin, you will receive a decree which I have just taken to place entirely in my pay the three 
regiments of infantry and the Polish cavalry regiment which are at Danzig: that puts an end to 
everything. Order that the 400 horses which I grant by my decree to the 9th Polish be bought without 
delay in the Duchy of Warsaw, so that this regiment has its 1,000 horses. Order also that this regiment 
have, like our lancers regiments, a certain number of carbines. Take steps for the Polish 5th, 10th and 
11th each to have 3,000 men; which will make 9,000 men for the three regiments. 

The French artillery company in Danzig will no longer be part of the 7th Division, since there is 
a Polish light artillery company. I need this company, since the increase of a 5th division in the 
cuirassiers requires the use of twelve more pieces of artillery. I gave the command of the 5th Division to 
General Valenee, senator. The 11th Cuirassier Regiment has been ordered to march; I recommend you 
to complete his horses. You will thus have three divisions of cuirassiers, each division of three 
regiments, each regiment presenting 900 men in battle; which makes 2,700 horses per division. '*! 


141 


Page 142 


Each division must be attached to a light cavalry regiment of three squadrons. The Ist squadron will 

leave on the 15th of January to go to Germany; the 2nd and 3rd squadrons will follow at fifteen days 
distance. Thus each division of cuirassiers will be 3,400 or 3,500 horses. Each division will have two 
artillery batteries on horseback or twelve pieces. 

I have thought fit to divide the whole Grand Army into fifteen divisions of infantry, all about 
equal to yours; the 7th, however, is part of it. The first nine divisions are under your command; the 10th, 
11th and 12th divisions are at the camp of Boulogne; the 13th, 14th and 15th meet in Bolzano, Italy; the 
Guard is composed of four divisions; which makes nineteen French divisions. The light cavalry is 
divided into fourteen brigades; five brigades are under your command, including that of General Castex; 
There are three in Italy, and six on the Rhine. Brigade generals are appointed and run journals to check 
the returns and organize the regiments. Six generals of division will be attached to these fourteen 
brigades. The cavalry reserve is made up of six divisions, five of which are cuirassiers and one of 
dragons. Each division has twelve pieces of light artillery. A siege crew is organized in Danzig and one 
in Magdeburg. Three bridge crews are organized at Danzig; these crews employ 400 cars and 2,000 
horses. 

The Bavarians, the Wurtembergers, the Saxons, the Poles, are not included in this organization. 

All calculations made, I hope to have in the month of March more than 200,000 infantrymen, 
45,000 cavalrymen, eight hundred pieces of cannon harnessed by more than 20,000 horses, and 1,500 
military transport vehicles. The French army will amount to nearly 300,000 men. You see that I have 
never made greater preparations. 

We lack horses of cavalry in France; it must be lifted from your side as much as you can; I am 
assured that there is a large enough quantity in Jutland and Holstein. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18401.-TO PRINCE LEBRUN, 
LIEUTENANT GENERAL OF THE EMPEROR IN HOLLAND, AMSTERDAM. 
Paris. December 30, 1811. 


I receive your letter of the 27th, by which you tell me that I have probably given orders for the 
use and preservation of? 


142 


Page 143 


"This huge amount of trees that were cut down were the eastern ems. I do not know what you mean. Has 
wood been cut down in Eastern Ems? I do not know. How many were cut down and by what order? 
Your correspondence is always so close that it means nothing. What does the word immense mean? Was 
not it easier to say the quantity? When you think you have to draw my attention to any part of the 
administration, give details and do not suppose that I know everything. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18402. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris, December 30, 1811. 


My son, Aldini sends you a decree by which I order the formation of a battalion of Italian 
military crews. This battalion will be formed, in all and for all, like the French battalions. I will have in 
my Italian army a battalion of military crews of six companies, each company serving 42 cars, forges 
and extensions; total, 252 wings for the battalion. I only want extensions and trolleys of new model, 
which carry four thousand. Two of these companies will be attached to the guard, the other four will be 
for the infantry. What you have today in military transport will be melted in this battalion. But this is 
independent of the ambulance caisson of each infantry regiment and the ambulance caisson and the field 
forge of each cavalry regiment. 

The war in Poland bears no resemblance to the Austrian war; without means of transport, 
everything is useless. Each battalion of military crews must have 771 men, 1,227 horses and 252 
wagons. Pass your markets without delay. You will take the men in the depots; you will be contracting 
for the purchase of horses in Switzerland. Have caisson made in the arsenal of Venice. That twenty-four 
hours after the receipt of this letter all your orders be dispatched. It takes sixty days of work to make the 
caisson; it takes 200 workers to make 200 caisson in sixty days; but, as all caissons must be made on the 
lst of February, employ 3, 4 or 500 workers. The woods and irons are not to be missed in Venice. This 
will bring a small delay in the work of the navy; but I do this myself in Antwerp to have as many new 
models as possible, which are preferable to others. '*° 





143 


Page 144 


I wish the 9th Military Transport Battalion to have these new caissons; for this purpose, I have it 
made at the arsenal of Turin; but I fear that this arsenal can not supply so many for so close a time: see if 
the arsenal of Pavia could not help to make a quarantine. So I look at this as a finished affair. 

You know the great need of bakers for the army; I suppose you have a good number in your 
divisions. A company of Italian nurses is also necessary. I suppose you have workers to build six kilns 
in twenty-four hours. These objects are of great importance in a Polish war. I told you that every man 
should have four pairs of shoes; it would even be advantageous to have five pairs. 

Independently of regimental ambulances, you need four Italian ambulances for the Italian 
division and for the guard; each ambulance being 4 caisson, it will use 16 caissons. Field forges must be 
supplied by the artillery; you must have many in the kingdom. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. the Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18403. - TOM. MAHET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, December 31, 1811. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, it would be appropriate to write to Baron Bignon to urge the government 
of the Grand Duchy to arm and supply Modlin, now that this place is in the case of supporting a siege, 
and to to direct the armaments which it would be useless to have at Warsaw. I would wish all Lancers of 
the Grand Duchy to be armed with rifles, as I have ordered for my own. Ask him for details of how 
these men are armed today. I would also like the lancers regiments to be full of 1,100 men and 1,000 
horses; which would make for men a total of 17,600, and for horses 16,000. If it was too 
disproportionate with the means of the Grand Duchy, I would at least want the complete to be 16,000 
men and 14,400 horses, that is to say 1,000 men and 900 horses per regiment, so as to always have at 
least 850 on the battlefield.'** 





144 


Page 145 


As the full is 12,000 men, it would be an increase of 4,000. I would willingly agree to pay for this run, 
but I would like to pay only the excess that would be beyond the current total of 12,000. 

I see with astonishment in the states of the Ist of November that there are more than 1,800 horses 
at deposits: it's way too much; there should not be more than 30 horses in each depot, except at the time 
of the return. 

I would not be far from organizing a military transport battalion organized like those of France. 
Could we get draft horses, harnesses, wagons in Warsaw? In how many months would these wagons be 
built? Would the duchy provide men? How much would it cost? It would have to be done under the 
colors of the Grand Duchy, in order to preserve appearances. 

It would also be necessary for Baron Bignon, with all the proper discretion, to give information 
which would reassure us as to the facility of having corn, oats, and, lastly, the necessary provisions for 
the army. It would also be necessary for him to take care of the means that could be organized, as was 
done about the month of May in the last campaign, to have a transport service from Thorn, Plock, 
Warsaw and of Zamosc on the points where one could go; a service of 4,000 wagons would be 
necessary. 

He must study men, without affecting anything, in order to know who to turn to when the time is 
right. Recommend to him to send memoirs on all these objects, with the appropriate discretion. 

I also want to know how much wine from Hungary could be obtained from the Vistula, and at 
what cost would these shipments return to Warsaw; what are the means of transport from Hungary to the 
Vistula; how much grain brandy could be produced from Moldova, and at what price. 

Apart from the horses necessary for the duchy, could we obtain 3,000 hussar horses? Where 
would we find them? At what price, and when would they be returned to Warsaw? You feel the 
importance of making these demands only by sure occasions, in order to avoid the way of the ordinary 
posts and that your letters are not read by the princes of the intermediate countries. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. '“° 





145 


Page 146 


18404. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 31, 1811. 


I receive your report on food and spirits. Buy, if they are of good quality, the 300,000 liters of 
brandy that are in Strasbourg. You will drive on Wesel these 1,200 barrels. The first convoy must leave 
before 6 January for Wesel. Write to the Prince of Eckmiihl to send the caissons of his regiments and 
military transports to take these 1,200 barrels and take them to Magdeburg. By this means they will 
arrive at Magdeburg without the transport costing me anything. 

Purchase 1,440 barrels of brandy in Bordeaux; have them loaded on the 240 wagons of the 10th 
Battalion of Military Crews, and direct them to Mainz, from where they will continue their route on 
Magdeburg. 

Purchase 1,440 barrels in Paris, which you will drive by the 2nd battalion of military transports 
to Magdeburg. 

In Cologne and Frankfurt, if the price is reasonable, and if they are of good quality, buy a good 
quantity of spirits which you will drive to Magdeburg, by bringing them up the Main to Wiirzburg, 
either using wagons carrying colonial goods in Frankfurt. Customs bring colonial goods to Frankfurt; 
food supplies wheat from Hamburg to Wesel. 

My intention is to buy 9,000 barrels of spirits and to have 34 million rations to transport them to 
Magdeburg. 

I do not want to take anything in Hamburg, because I will always be able to draw there. 

As for the wines, bringing in Bordeaux wine seems to me a very complicated operation, unless it 
is combined with the return of the wagons that transport the colony's produce. Besides, the wines arrive 
by Hungary and Silesia; they arrive at Magdeburg by Wurzburg and Bamberg, where there is a large 
quantity; there are even many in Dresden. It is therefore indispensable, before throwing themselves into 
the speculations of the wines, to know how much they cost in Dresden, Wurzburg, Bamberg, Warsaw, 
by bringing them from Hungary and Krakow. There are also wines on the Rhine, near Mainz, which are 
good. How much can we have, and at what price? It will only be when you give me this information '“° 


146 


Page 147 


that I will stop my ideas on the purchase of the wines necessary for the hospitals and convalescents. 

I will gladly encourage by any means the arrival to the army of 4,000 barrels of fine wine, which 
the staff and other officers may have for 50 sous or 3 francs a bottle, which will be of great importance 
to their relief. This would be advantageous speculation for a trader. You feel that there is only commerce 
that can handle this speculation and that can have the means to preserve the wine, to prevent it from 
being drunk en route or being damaged. 

According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18405. - TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, 
INTENDANT GENERAL OF THE CROWN, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 31, 1811 


Monsieur le Duke de Cadore, I have just seen porcelains sent to the Empress for her New Year's 
presents. These porcelains are very ugly; make sure they look better another year. Have a lunch, on each 
cup of which are the portraits of the Empress and the six princesses my sisters and sisters-in-law. Have 
another make the portraits of the ladies of the Empress's palace. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Mr. Charavay. 


18406. - NOTE TO THE MAJOR GENERAL, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 31, 1811. 


Granted General Fournier permission to go home. The major-general will make known his 
country so as to prevent him from going to Paris. It is the corruption of the big city that attracts all these 


young senses. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Empire Archives, 
18407. - TO THE GENERAL CAULAINCOURT, DUKE OF VICENCE, 


GREAT SQUIRE, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 31, 1811. 


The Duke of Vicenza, I do not hear any more about the officier d'ordonnance Atthalin. I think 
he's stubbornly finishing his mission,“ 


147 


Page 148 


although ill. Send him orders to return to Paris to recover. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Mr. Charavag. 


18408. - TO CAPTAIN GOURGAUD, 
OFFICER OF ORDER OF THE EMPEROR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, December 31, 1811. 


Go to the island of Ré; see the troops of refractory who are there, and let me know in detail, 
detachment by detachment, their situation, the state of their clothing, their armament and their 
education, of what country are the men, and if it can be expected that we could manage to direct them to 
Strasbourg for the German army. 

See the officers of the 29th Light, 10th Light, and Sapper Companies, do they think they would 
lead three-quarters of these individuals on the Rhine? 

You will go to the island of Aix and the island of Oleron, where you will make the same 
inspection. You will stay four to five days in each island; you will write to me every night. You will see 
the batteries of the islands of Aix and d'Oleron, and all those of the Salumonards. 

You will go aboard the ships I have on the island of Aix and the frigates I have at Maumusson. 

As soon as you have spent a fortnight in these different stations, you will visit the batteries to the 
Gironde. You will see the new battery that I had done at Royan and at the Pointe de Grave. You will go 
aboard the frigate which is in the Gironde. You will also go to Rochefort and you will see the work that 
is done there. 

You will give me an account of everything in the greatest detail, and you will let me know if all 
the soldiers have hoods. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18409. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE COPRS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris. December 31, 1811. 


Cousin, write to Poland to know if it would be possible to buy 8,000 horses for the light cavalry 


depot on the left bank of the Vistula. How much would these horses cost? What size would they have? 
How many days would it take'*® 


148 


Page 149 


prevent in advance? Could we also find 3, 000 draft horses? It seems to me that Poland provides few 
resources of this kind. Could you find in Mecklenburg and in the north of Germany 3,000 horsepower 
and at what price? Could we form in Warsaw a battalion of military crews, organized like ours in six 
companies, of 771 men and 1,227 horses, and 252 wagons? Where would horses be found? Where 
would the caissons be made? Would we find men? In this case would it not be necessary to send some 
company commander to help organize them? How much would the formation of this battalion cost; 
when would it be over? If I decided to train him, I would like him to appear to be created for the Polish 
army in order to keep appearances. 

All Polish cavalry regiments are only four squadrons; I notice that the four squadrons should be 
placed in the army and have only one stake in the depot. Communicate to Prince Poniatowski my decree 
on the armament of the cavalry. It is impossible to leave so many regiments of spearmen without rifles; 
it is necessary that all men, or at least half, have carbines, as was the ancient custom of the Poles. Press 
it, because I find it unfortunate to have 7 to 8,000 unarmed men, especially since the Cossacks are armed 
with rifles. Let me know, regiment by regiment, how the Polish cavalry is armed, what is the armament 
of the lancers, which is that of the light horse. On the reports you sent me, I do not see any cuirassiers 
anymore. I would like all the regiments to have 1,100 men and 1,000 horses, to have 950 in front of the 
enemy. For the sixteen regiments it would require 16,000 horses; there are, I believe, 11,000; it would be 
5,000 to buy. In addition, there should be men and saddles. If there were no other difficulty than money, 
I would gladly provide for it; but would one have the men, their clothing and their harness? I have 1,800 
horses at the depots, which makes more than 100 horses per regiment; I suppose three-quarters would 
join the war squads. Give me the status report of the troops of the Grand Duchy on January Ist. Enter 
into all the details for the artillery, for you have sent me a report of the artillery of the Saxon army, but 
you have not sent me a similar one for the Grand Duchy. 

Also enter the details of military transports. 

I come back to the situation of their cavalry. I see that the whole is only 12,000, men and horses; 
I would like the complete suit to be 17,600 men and 16,000 horses. If that!*? 


149 


Page 150 


it seems to them to be too considerable, we could admit a suit of 16,000 men and 14,400 horses, that is, 
900 horses per regiment; so it would be 4,900 horses to buy, I repeat, I do not have trouble spending it. 
Prince Poniatowski should also be asked to prepare some work for the organization of the 
military transport resources, as had been done in May, some time before the Friedland campaign, to 
secure the means of convoy and transport of Thorn, Plock, Zamosc and Warsaw on the points where one 
would be. I guess wheat and oats will be in abundance this year. 
NAPOLEON, 
From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl, 


END OF THE YEAR 1811.'° 





150 


Page 151 


YEAR 1812. 


18410. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 2, 1812. 


Count de Cessac, Iam sending you for your government the organization of the Grand Army. 
The corps of the Elbe will form two corps. It is necessary to send an authorizing officer to each corps 
and all the administrative staff that is indispensable. Present me an organizational project. As I have not 
yet organized the Elbe Observation Corps into two corps, send it all double. 
NAPOLEON. 


NOTE ON THE ORGANIZATION OF THE GRANDE ARMY. 


The Grand Army will be divided into four corps: the observation corps of the Elbe will make 
two; the corps of observation of the ocean will make one; the observation corps of Italy will do another. 

The Grand Army will be organized into 15 infantry divisions. 

Ist division: 13th light, 5 battalions; 17th line, 5 battalions; 30th line, 5 battalions; Baden 
regiment (the one at Danzig), 2 battalions; total, 17 battalions. 

2nd division: 15th light, 5 battalions; 33rd line, 5 battalions; 48th line, 5 battalions; Spanish 
regiment, 2 battalions; total, 17 battalions. 

3rd division: 17th light, 5 battalions; 12th line, 5 battalions; 21st of line, 5 battalions; 127th line, 
2 battalions; total, 17 battalions. 

Ath division: 33rd light, 4 battalions; 85th line) 5 battalions: 108th line, 5 battalions; Hesse- 
Darmstadt regiment (the one at Danzig, 2 battalions, total 16 battalions. 

5th division: 25th of line, 5 battalions; 57th line, 5 battalions; 61st line, 5 battalions; 111th of 
line, 5 battalions; total, 20 battalions. 

6th Division (meets at Osnabriick): 26th Light, 4 battalions; 56th line, 5 battalions; 19th of line, 5 
battalions; 128th line, 2 battalions; total, 16 battalions. 

7th division (all this division, commanded by General Gran-jean, is reunited in Danzig): Sth 
Polish, 3 battalions; 10th Polish, 3 battalions; 11th Polish) 3 battalions; 1st Westphalian, 2 battalions;"*! 


1.51. 


Page 152 


8th Westphalian, 2 battalions; Saxons, 2 battalions; Bavarian, 2 battalions; total, 17 battalions. 

8th Division (meets at Miinster): 11th Light, 4 battalions; 2nd in line, 5 battalions; 37th line, 5 
battalions; 124th line, 3 battalions; total, 17 battalions. 

9th Division (meets at Nijmegen): Croats, 2 battalions; Swiss, 9 battalions; 123rd line, 3 
battalions; total, 14 battalions. 


OCEAN OBSERVATION CORPS, 


10th Division (meeting place not yet fixed): 24th Light, 4 battalions; 46th line, 5 battalions; 72nd 
line, 4 battalions: 126th line, 3 battalions; Ist Portuguese regiment, 2 battalions, total, 18 battalions. 

11th division (the meeting place is not yet fixed): Illyrian regiment, 4 battalions; 4th light, 4 
battalions; 18th light, 4 battalions; 93rd line, 5 battalions; 2nd Portuguese regiment, 2 battalions; total, 
19 battalions. 

12th Division (meeting place not yet fixed): 29th Light, 4 battalions; 44th of line, 2 battalions; 
provisional regiment of Boulogne, 2 battalions; 125th line, 3 battalions; 129th line, 2 battalions; total, 13 
battalions. 


OBSERVATION CORPS OF ITALY. 


13th Division (meets in Bolzano): 8th Light, 2 battalions; 84th of line, 4 battalions; 92nd line, 4 
battalions; 106th line, 4 battalions; Croats, 2 battalions; total, 16 battalions. 

14th Division (meets at Trent): 18th light, 4 battalions; 9th light, 4 battalions; 35th line, 4 
battalions; 53rd line, 4 battalions; Spanish regiment, 2 battalions; total, 18 battalions. 

15th Italian Division (meets in Brescia): 3rd Italian Light, 4 battalions, Dalmatia, 3 battalions; 
2nd Italian line, 3 battalions; 3rd Italian line, 4 battalions; 5th Italian liana, 2 battalions; total, 16 
battalions. 


CAVALRY. - BRIGADES OF LIGHT CAVALRY. 


Ist brigade, General Pajol: 2nd of chasseurs, 9th of light Polish cavalry, which is in Danzig. 
2nd Brigade, General Bordesoulle: Ist and 3rd of chasseurs. 

3rd Brigade, General Jacquinot: 7th of hussars, 9th of light horse. 

Ath Brigade, General Piré: 8th of hussars, 7th of chasseurs. a 





152 


Page 153 


5th Brigade, General Castex: 23rd and 24th of chasseurs. 

These first five brigades are in the observation corps of the Elbe. 
6th Brigade, General Corbineau: 7th and 20th of chasseurs, 8th of light horse. 
7th brigade, General Saint-Genieés: 11th and 12th of chasseurs. 
8th Brigade, General Burthe: 5th and 9th hussars. 

9th Brigade, General Mouriez: 11th hussars, 6th light horse. 

For these four brigades, the meeting place is not yet fixed. 

10th Brigade, General Gérard: 6th and 25th chasseurs. 

11th Brigade, General Gautherin: 6th of hussars, 8th of chasseurs. 
These two brigades will meet on the Brenta, near Bassano. 

12th Brigade, General Ferrieres: 9th and 10th of chasseurs. 

This brigade will meet on Oglio and Brescia. 

13th Brigade, Italian general Villata: 2nd and 3rd of chasseurs. 
This brigade will meet on Oglio and Brescia. 


CAVALRY RESERVE. 


1st division (in Hanover), General Saint - Germain: 2nd, 3rd and 9th cuirassiers; the Ist of 


lancers will be attached to this division. 


2nd division (in Bonn), General Beaumont: 5th, 8th and 10th of cuirassiers, 2nd of lancers. 
3rd division (at Erfurt), General Dournerc: 4th, 7th and 14th. of cuirassiers, 3rd of the lancers. 
Ath Division (Cologne): Ist and 2nd Carabineros, Ist Cuirassiers, 4th Lancers. 

5th Division (in Hanover), General Valencia: 6th, 11th and 12th Cuirassiers, 5th Lancers. 

6th division: 7th, 23rd, 28th and 30th of dragons; will meet on the Mincio. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18411. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris. January 2, 1812 


Cousin, I would like you to give me a report, to be printed, in which you will make known to me 


what results from the correspondence on General Girard's affair. It seems that General Briche was 
posted on the side where the enemy was coming from, and that he was perfectly surprised, not being 


bivouacked, but lying in 


153 


153 


Page 154. 


a good house, and the horses of his hussars unsaddled. I will dictate this report to you (1). My aim is to 
strike the minds of the colonels and generals of light troops, and to recall, in principle, a colonel of 
chasseurs or hussars who, in order to spend the night at the bivouac and in correspondence with his great 
Guards, go to bed, deserve death. 

I think Marshal Mortier has some information on that. As in this I do not have in mind the 
business of General Briche, but to raise the spirit of light cavalry, it is necessary that this report be well 
struck. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18412. - TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 3, 1812. 


Count Mollien, you send to Hamburg more money than you receive. Customs, however, make a 
disadvantage operation for the treasury by sending money to Paris, because the director of customs has a 
small interest in it. Take prompt measures on this, so that this double operation, contrary to the interests 
of the treasury, ceases and no longer takes place in the future. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18413. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG 
Paris. January 3, 1812. 


Cousin, I suppose you have already received the decree of December 12th on Danzig. You will 
see that I made a fund of 12,000 francs, by which I must have at Danzig 33,000 quintals of wheat, or 
66,000 quintals of pond weight, 3,900 quintals of rice, 1,900 for the supply of headquarters and 2,000 
for the reserve, 612,000 decreiters of oats. The funds are given for all that. It is necessary that of the 
66,000 quintals of wheat, 50,000 be converted into flour on March Ist; that this flour is ready to be 
entonnellée, and that the barrels are of such a size that they can easily be placed on our new wagons. All 
this must be prepared so that when the movement is unmasked, we can do 





1) This report has not been found.'™* 





154 


Page 155 


embark the flour without warning, and pass it either by the Vistula or the Frische Huff, or on the ground 
by means of the crews. It is also necessary that the 600,000 biscuit flakes are in crates that go perfectly 
on the new boxes. The same applies to 2,000 metric quintals of rice that do not belong to the 
headquarters supply. I have already told you that, independently of this rice, you should send all the rice 
which is available to you either in Hamburg, Magdeburg, or in the places of the Oder. With these 
precautions, we shall be assured of having 600,000 rations of biscuit and 50,000 quintals of flour weight 
of marc; which will be about 200,000 for thirty days. It will be a reasonable supply, but it must be 
arranged so that it can be transported two or three hundred leagues, and in particular rice. 

I would like to have a report which showed me the means of milling we have at Danzig. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18414. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. January 3, 1812. 


My Son, the Minister of War has sent you my orders for the organization of the 13th, 14th, and 
15th Divisions, for that of the four brigades of light cavalry and the division of dragoons. Hide your 
movement as long as you can, beginning with everything that is insignificant, that is, the farthest. I 
decided that the 13th division would be reunited in Bolzano and to the limits of the Bavarian territory; 
that the part of the division which comes from the Illyrian provinces would go to Linz; except for the 
Croats, who must leave only well dressed and well armed; that the 14th division would meet on the side 
of Trento and Roveredo, and the 15th division on Lodronc, Rocca d'Anfo, Brescia, and Salo; that two 
brigades of light cavalry should meet in the valley of the Brenta, so that the head is only one march from 
Trent, and the other two brigades in the valley of the Chiese, so as to be able to quickly Rocca d'Anfo, 
that the division of dragoons would meet on the Mincio; the great park, the military transports, and the 
engineers at Verona. Of course, each division will have with it its artillery, its detachment of engineers, 
and all that is necessary to it. As it is possible that divisions!” 


155 


Page 156 


remain in this state for twelve or fifteen days, measures must be taken for the subsistence and for the 
divisions to carry with them eight days of food, in order to walk rapidly. You will not make any request 
for passage in Bavaria, nor any demonstration; when the case arrives, I will give the necessary orders. 

You have to send me another state of training of your corps, which is better done. Take the 
necessary measures for all the companies of the Italian regiments to be 140 strong, and for your sixteen 
battalions to have 13,440 men, their regimental artillery companies not included. It is even necessary 
that there be ten more men per company, so that at its passage in Regensburg the Italian corps is to have 
13,440 men present under arms. 

The 8th and 18th regiments of light infantry may have the same suit, since these regiments have 
just received 400 refractory men. Croats must have the same suit. 

As for the other French regiments, they must be worn as soon as possible. The battalion of the 
10th of line must have arrived; you will do it on the spot. You can also incorporate the two battalions of 
the 2nd regiment of the Mediterranean which have 1,500 men, which will make you nearly 2,000 men. 
The 4th Battalion of the 8th Light, at the end of December, left the Hyéres Islands, composed of 
refractory conscripts, to rejoin its regiment; you will thus have three battalions of the 8th light, instead of 
two; you will make this third battalion tier with the other two. As I attach great importance to the fact 
that the Italian observation corps speaks in its entirety, write to Prince Borghese to find out what 
deposits that are in his government can supply to your regiments. 

I order, moreover, that the battalions of the regiment of the Mediterranean which are on the 
island of Elba and Corsica follow the movement to join you. I would like all your battalions to cross the 
Tyrol, strong with 840 men each. It will be necessary to train at Trento a depot for all sick and tired 
men; as they heal, they will come to you; we will only send them away when there are 1,500 or 2,000, 
with the effects that the corps will want to send. All the pontoon companies which are in Italy or in the 
government of Prince Borghese must meet at Verona, as well as the greater part of the sapper 
companies, the pontoon companies completed to 120 men and the sapper companies to 140 men. The 
same is true of companies'”° 


156 


Page 157 


minors. All this happened that Great Army will be distributed in the corps according to the organization. 

The regiments of Italian chasseurs are very weak; it should be increased to 1,100 men and 1,000 
horses. You must have men available; have them armed and dressed, to carry your regiments to 1,200 
men. They will be able to go on foot, with their saddles, and take their horses to Dresden or Posen, 
where you have bought them in advance. All French light cavalry regiments have contracts for 300 
horses on the Hamburg and Hanover side, so that they will be at 1,000 horses in the course of March. 
The guard must be very complete, so that you will find yourself 46 to 47,000 infantry men, not to 
mention the artillery and the engineers. You must have two battalions of military crews, one French and 
one Italian. While waiting for the new wagons to be made, old ones will be used; but do not send them 
from Placentia until the last moment, that is to say, at the beginning of February, since, in order to reach 
Verona, I do not think it takes more than seven or eight days. You will send the cadres of the battalions 
of the 10th and 20th to their depots, and those of the battalions of the 2nd regiment of the Mediterranean 
at Toulon. Make sure, before the departure of these executives, that the NCOs have two years of service; 
if they did not have them, have them exchange with old sergeants and corporals of your regiments. 

The Minister of War Administration had to give orders that all the employees of the 
administration should go to Milan on the 15th of February. 

Let me know where the Italian conscription of 1812 is. Is the 1811 conscription up? 

NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18415. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, January 4th, 1812. 


My Cousin, you will bring together the Grand Equerry, the Duke of Istria, General La Riboisiere, 
the ordering officer of the Guard, and ask them answers to these questions: 

1 What kind of transport wagon do Russians and Poles use in their countries? 2. How many 
such wagons would they cost to make? 3 ° How much do they weigh?'*’ 


157 


Page 158 


4'" How much do they carry quintals? 5" How many large horses do they need? 6" Would it not be 
proper to have, after the army, in Poland, one or more battalions coupling these wagons? 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18416. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, January 5th, 1812. 


My cousin, order that the three Polish regiments, the artillery company and the Polish sappers 
who are in Andalusia, leave upon receipt of your letter to go to Burgos. You will make it plain to the 
Duke of Dalmatia that this order does not suffer delay. You will order Marshal Suchet to direct the three 
regiments of the Vistula, with all the Poles he has on Tudela, where they will receive new orders. These 
orders will be given in figures; you will reiterate them, and you will make these marshals feel the 
importance of their prompt execution. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18417. -NOTE 
DICTATED IN TRADE AND MANUFACTURING COUNCIL. 
Palace of St. Cloud, January 6, 1812. 


The Minister of the Interior should make a report which will make known the quantity of acres 
of sugar beet required from each department, the quantity supplied, the factories established there, by 
making known the causes which prevented the realization of all what we had hoped. 

The Minister of the Interior would then make a new distribution for next year's crops. Beets are 
sown in March; so we have the necessary time. 

The second operation would consist in drafting a decree, which would say that any individual 
who wishes to establish a factory will have to take a license; that all those who have established it up to 
this day will retain them by right, and will make known if they wish to continue to manufacture in 1812. 

All those who will undertake to manufacture such a quantity, the minimum of which would be 
fifty thousand, will apply for the license. The'*® 


158 


Page 159 


refiners will have preference; to this end, the prefect would write to them to ask them if they want to 
take advantage of it. 

It will be given up to four or five hundred patents. 

It will be understood in the report that, already this year, the farmer has suffered, because the 
factories have not been in proportion with the crop. 

Any patented individual (by realizing these conditions, that is to say, being able to manufacture 
in October next year, will obtain the guarantee: 

1“ That no right shall be established for four years on the object of manufacture; 

2° A declaration would be made that if, as a result of these measures, the five hundred factories 
are active in the month of October, cane sugar will be prohibited in the Empire as English merchandise. 

The second condition should be added, that the departments would have carried the whole crop. 

This is a sacrifice of the Government for four years for the benefit of the people, because sugar 
can not sustain itself at six francs when there are five hundred factories. 

Manufacturers will have four years of exemption from contributions and will be sure of the 
continuation of the continental system through prohibition. 

Finally, everything would be prepared for the management at the end of four years, and the 
Government, leaving the price of the time, would have the benefit for its profit. Assuming sugar at 40 
cents, it would be, on a consumption of 30 millions, a profit of 60 millions. It would be advisable to 
establish four beautiful manufactories in the four points of France where there is the most sugar beet, 
and where one might hope to exploit what to make from 1 million to 4 millions sugar, in them placing 
on canals or rivers. We have nine months from now to October to organize these factories. It would be 
an advance that would not go to 2 or 3 aggravates, and that would put the Government well informed of 
this affair. Good chemists would be placed at the head of these establishments, and many pupils would 
be sent there. 

According to the copy. Archives of Agriculture, Commerce and Public Works. 


18418. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, January 6, 1812, 


My Cousin, there is in the Reveries of the Marshal of Saxony, among!” 


Page 160 


many extremely mediocre things, ideas on how to make the enemy countries contribute without tiring 
the army, which seemed to me to be good. Read them and put the contents in an instruction that will be 
sent to my generals in Spain. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18419. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT OF CESSAC. 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 6, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, the scarcity of horses, the difficulty of replacing them, and the 
advantage of oxen, in that it is easy to procure everywhere, and that they feed more easily, carry me to 
desire to have one or more battalions of military transports coupled with oxen; give me a report on the 
weights they could drag, and finally what they would cost. 


NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18420. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, January 6, 1812. 


Cousin, you will have received a decree for the purpose of arming the heavy cavalry with 
carbines, carried as the cavalry once wore them. Pay special attention that your cuirassier regiments be 
provided with these carbines, and that they receive them in the beginning of February. Order that 
arrangements be made accordingly for the saddle. Have the regiments exercise to teach them to load and 
unload this weapon, and the first elements of the maneuver on foot, so that, being in a village and 
dismounting to parade, they know how to get together. 

I ordered the light horse to be armed with rifles; I would like the Poles to have it; I learn that they 
have only six in each company, which is ridiculous, dealing with the Cossacks, who are armed from 
start to finish. Let me know if the 9th Lancers has one. 

NAPOLEON 


From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl.'©° 


160 


Page 161 
18421. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, January 7, 1812, 


My Cousin, I approve the departure of the 12th convoy of funds, which will bear, to know: 


Silver draft Totals 
For the 130th regiment. 100,000f 50,000f 150,000f 
For gendarmerie squadrons 
From Navarre, Biscay and Burgos. 100,000 100,000 200,000 
For the Santona garrison. 50,000 50,000 
For the rest of the North Army. 300,000 300,000 600,000 
For the King 250,000 250,000 500,000 
For the Central Army 100,000 150,000 250,000 
For the army of Portugal. 100,000 150,000 250,000 


TOTALS. 1,000,000 1,000,000 2,000,000 


Send out these 2 million on the spot without delay. 
NAPOLEON, 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18422. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, January 7, 1812. 


Cousin, I do not understand what you mean, that the Poles have been deprived of food; I suppose 
they are the country food, but they are given bread; for it would be too absurd and too contrary to the 
interests of the country's treasury to give them the silver bread. 

Prince Poniatowski's essay does not mean anything. It has never been asserted that the National 
Guards could assemble. The House has heard that by giving them a town, such as Grodno, Krakow or 
even Pultusk, they will not be ransomed by a detachment of thirty or forty Cossacks. If this result is 
obtained, it is not necessary to ask for more) and it is enough that the cities and the rear of the army take 
shelter from the incursions of the light cavalry, for the reason that they have weapons . 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl.'° 





161 


Page 162 


18423. - NOTE TO M. BARBIER, 
LIBRARY OF THE EMPEROR, PARIS. 
Paris. January 7, 1812. 


The Emperor asks for a history of Courland, and all that can be found of history, geography, and 
topography on Riga, Livonia, & c. 
NAPOLEON 
From the original comm. From Mr. Louis Barhier. 


18424.- TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNTY, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 9, 1812. 


Count Decres, in the instruction to Captain Meynard, let him know the situation of Tortosa, of 
which we are masters, that of Valencia (on December 25th this place was besieged, which gave rise to 
great movements of the place at sea), finally that of Malaga; we occupy it. Moreover, in the southern 
part of Spain, this officer will find in Algiers the information he will need. He will fill up at Algiers the 
same mission that the commander of /'Adrienne and la Pénélope must fulfill. Let him master to establish 
his cruise wherever he wants. Let him know where the enemy is coming from. Captain Meynard has 
February and March to cross. The corvette (brick or large sloop), good sailors, will stay in Tarragona. 
Put on this vessel an officer whom you will designate to command the port of Tarragona and direct the 
consignments of this place on Barcelona. If ever these frigates were stuck in Tarragona, it would be 
necessary that they contribute with all their resources to the defense of the place, and you must give 
them the order; but I hope that this case will not happen, and that, within twenty-four hours, they will be 
under sail. The captain will take care of taking the governor's packages. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18425. - DECISION. 
Paris, January 9, 1812. 








The minister of the navy proposes to the They are too young. If I give the Legion of 
Emperor to appoint members of the Legion of | Honor for having been to the colonies, what 
Honor, Messrs. De Panai and Reinty, auditors | will I have to give to those who will take 
of the Conseil d'Etat who have just English ships?!” 
successfully completed a mission to Batavia. 











NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Naval Archives. 


162 


D'aprés la copie. Archives de la marine. 
NAPOLEON. 


Page 163 


18426. - TO M. COLLIN, COUNT OF SUSSY, 
STATE ADVISER, DIRECTOR GENERAL OF CUSTOMS, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 10, 1812. 


Count de Sussy, I have decided that there will be in the future a Minister of Manufactures and 
Trade, and I have appointed you to fulfill these high offices. I had to recognize the good services you 
have rendered by organizing customs as they are today. 

The department of manufactures and commerce will have in its attributions: the direction and the 
administration of the trade. its movement in the ports and in the various places of the interior; 
manufactures and police regulations relating thereto; the appointment of stockbrokers and brokers; 
health administrations (with the exception of Toulon); training and administration of indigenous 
products; the examination of the various processes of improvement of the factories, the surveillance of 
the administration of the customs, the personnel of this administration, the proposal of the tariffs and all 
the regulations relative to this object; the supervision of the general supplies of the empire, the 
movement, the entry and the exit of commodities; correspondence with consuls with foreign powers on 
matters relating to commerce; the formation of the General Council of Commerce and the report of all 
cases submitted or to be submitted to the Imperial Council of the catches. In a few days you will take an 
oath. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18427. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, January 10, 1812. 


Cousin, I trained four army corps. The observation corps of the Elbe will be composed of your 
first five divisions and Ist and 2nd brigades of light cavalry. The 2nd Corps of the Elbe will be 
commanded by the Duke of Reggio and will be composed of the 6th, 8th and 9th Divisions and 5th and 
6th Light Cavalry Brigades. The Duke of Reggio's headquarters will be in Minster, and all will be 
assembled. February 15,'° 


163 


Page 164 


The observation corps of the Ocean will be composed of the 7th, 10th and 11th divisions, and 9th 
and 14th light cavalry brigades. Two of these divisions will be reunited at Mainz, with headquarters, 
artillery, etc., on the 15th of February. The 12th Division can only meet in the course of April. 

The observation corps of Italy will be composed of the 13th, 14th and 15th divisions, and the 
12th and 13th light cavalry brigades. 

My reserve cavalry will be divided into three corps, each corps commanded by a lieutenant- 
general. 

The Ist Cavalry Corps will be composed of the Ist Light Cavalry Division, commanded by 
General Bruyére, composed of the 3rd and 4th Brigades; of the 1st Division of Cuirassiers, commanded 
by General Saint-Germain and the 5th Division of Cuirassiers, commanded by General Valence. A light 
artillery battery will be attached to the Bruyére division. This corps, thus having thirty pieces of light 
artillery, will be commanded by General Nansouty. 

The 2nd Cavalry Corps will be composed of the 2nd Light Cavalry Division, commanded by 
General Wattter, consisting of the 7th and 8th Brigades, which meet at Mainz, the 2nd and 4th Cuirassier 
Divisions. 

The 3rd Cavalry Corps will be composed of the 3rd Light Cavalry Division, commanded by 
General Kellermann and formed of the 10th and 11th Brigades, which meets in Verona, from the 3rd 
Division of Cuirassiers, under the command of General Doumerc, and the division of dragoons that 
meets in Verona. 

Everyone will be back at work and ready to walk by February 15th. 

I thought I ought to give you notice of this formation of the army, that you might form an idea of 
it. The 125th is left until it is replaced on the side of Emden. I ordered that the 4th, 5th and 6th 
companies of the 6th Battalion of Military Crews be formed under your direction. You will use the one 
hundred and twenty caissons and harnesses of old model of the 12th battalion, and you will take the men 
in the 32nd military division. The Minister of War Administration will write to you for executives. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl.'™ 





164 


Page 165 


18428. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 12, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the Croats do not seem to me to be organized enough to leave; I want them to 
stay in Paris until further notice. It is necessary that, before leaving, they should have their caissons, 
their artillery company, their well-filled sacks, two pairs of shoes in the bag, and one on their feet; let 
them be maneuvered a little, and complete and adjust their dress. I will see them at the first parade I will 
pass in February, and I will then give orders for their departure. 

Pass the review of the 24th light tomorrow morning, so that the men who are injured and marked 
for retirement do not follow the regiment. It is necessary to attach a second-in-command to this 
regiment. 

Finally, it would be necessary to make an order on a way to tie their spear to their horse, when 
the light horse fight on foot, so that they have complete freedom to use their rifle. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18429. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 13, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I have just granted you an additional sum of 2,400,000 francs 
from Danzig's budget of 1811. It is my intention that you purchase without delay 100,000 quintals of 
wheat, 100,000 quintals of rye, and one million bushels of oats. 

I have given you the order, which I repeat, that the rice which is at Passau, at Hamburg and in the 
places of the Oder, in the hands of the French administrations, and at Magdeburg, should be directed 
without delay to Danzig. I charge the director-general of customs to prevent any sale of rice, and to 
place at your disposal, to be directed on Danzig, all the rice which is at Hamburg and other places of 
Germany. 

My intention is not to pay it at the price of the contractor, which is twenty-five percent too 
expensive, but to pay it at the lowest price possible. I do not need to recommend that we have to put an 
address in these purchases. By this means, I shall have on the Ist of March, namely: on the reserve, 
200,000 quintals of wheat and'® 





165 


Page 166 


rye; at the headquarters supply, 70,000; total, 270,000 quintals. Of these 270,000 quintals, 70,000 will 
be converted into flour, well embroidered, and can make thirty days of walking. I shall have at the 
reserve 4,000 quintals of rice; to the supply of siege, 4,000 quintals of rice; from Passau and the places 
of the Oder, 4,000 quintals of rice; total, 12,000 quintals of rice. I shall have 1,100,000 bushels of oats in 
reserve; to the supply of seats, 600,000 bushels of oats, total, 2 million bushels. 

I will then have 20 millions of rations or bread, or for an army of 400,000 men for fifty days; I 
will have 20 million rations of rice an ounce a day, or 400,000 men for fifty days. I'll have 2 million 
bushels of oats, or 50,000 horses for fifty days. I guess I'm not mistaken in these different data. 
Regardless of this, there is a large supply on the Oder. 

As for the biscuit, I wish that the biscuit which is at Danzig be collected and embarked in a few 
days, as well as the 1,800,000 rations which exist in the places of the Oder, so as to be able to move 
quickly; which will make 2,300,000 rations of biscuit. Let me know how long it would take Danzig to 
make 1,700,000 rations, requiring 4 million rations of biscuit. As this time is most favorable to 
purchases, it is necessary that you give orders without delay. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18430. - TO MARECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris. January 13, 1812. 


Cousin, I receive your letters of the 8th. I approve that the two detachments of 200 Westphalian 
men go to Danzig to complete these regiments. Make the same request to the courts of Hesse-Darmstadt, 
Wurtemberg, Bavaria, Saxony, through my ministers. This will serve to repair the losses that these 
regiments would have made by death, desertion or otherwise, and to keep them in full. I am pleased to 
see you complete the supply of rice to Gdansk. Give me the state of supply of this place on the Ist of 
February. Send me the map of Gliickstadt and all the information you have on this place: against whom 
did the Danes make it? which seats did it support? what is his'® 





166 


Page: 167 


armament? what are its fortifications? I will always leave on the shores of the 32nd military division a 
corps of 7,000 to 8,000 men, which, together with the troops that the Danes would provide in the 
circumstances, would, in the present state of affairs, put Hamburg under the protection of the invasion of 
the English. We could draw from Holland some reinforcements to keep the batteries. It is necessary that 
these batteries be closed to the throat, either by turns, or by country works, so that they are safe from 
landings and fire from the ships. These batteries, with some men in their enclosure, would be defended; 
In case of a great expedition of the English, they would be taken, but they are made for that, Let me 
know their number, their location and their armament. Understand in this detail the batteries of the 
Mecklenburg coast. It seems to me that I have ordered the formation of coast guards, and I will leave 
three French artillery companies on the coast. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmihl. 


18431, -NOTE ON THE CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE, 
DICTATED TO THE TRADE AND MANUFACTURING BOARD, 
Palace of St. Cloud. January 13, 1812, 


There is only one big system to take: or stay as we are, which can be supported by good reasons, 
or walk big to a different order. 

Stay as we are? We know how we are. We must begin by establishing what His Majesty means 
by a great system, so that we can compare the two states. 

The sugar has risen to Italy at an exorbitant price, so that there is a considerable gain on the 
sugar which comes from Koenigsberg and which pays a continental right; which proves that prohibitive 
laws are observed in Italy. 

Sugar is cheaper in the countries of Confederation; and it is because these countries are not under 
the control of His Majesty, and because the princes follow the continental system less well. 

The sugar is worth at Leipzig 51 under the pound, weight of marc, at Frankfort 50 sous; that is to 
say, in these two countries, the law being only 30 sous, it is still worth 20 sous above the law. It would 
be much less if the ordinary channels were open. We can therefore say that France also supplies the 
Confederation, oe 





167 


Page 168 


In Naples, sugar is worth 5 francs; it is as expensive as in Paris and Milan; therefore, in France, 
Italy, and Naples, the laws are executed; and these two countries, which are not under the regime of the 
French Customs, know that they would be united if they did not execute the laws of the Empire, 

The Government has to provide for the consumption of France, which has 43 millions of 
population; to that of Italy, which has 6,500,000; to that of Naples, which has 5 millions, and to that of 
Confederation, which is raised to 10 millions; which is about 65 million, that is to say almost triple the 
consumption of ancient France, 

Assuming that the consumption of all these countries is also the same as it was in ancient France, 
it is supposed to be reduced by two-thirds, 

France consumed 45 million pounds of raw sugar or 450,000 quintals. His Majesty will grant 
licenses to bring 450,000 quintals of raw sugar into the Empire; this will produce 70 million francs in 
duties, will require a cash export of 10 millions, and will result in an export of the products of our soil 
and our manufactures, principally in wines and silks, for a value of 30 millions of francs. 

His Majesty will apply the same system to coffee, Buenos-Ayres leathers, indigo, tea, woolen 
cotton, and dyestuff. Sugar is supposed to enter for one-third, which will be clearly established. in the 
minutes. 

This will therefore produce a great activity in the manufactures, an encouragement for 
navigation, the navy, the brokerage, a right of 200 millions collected by the customs during the year, a 
germ of activity and life in all our ports. 

For France, the result will be a dream that could only be achieved through the passage of the 
exclusive system; for how could it be conceived that England, without the absolute enclosure of the 
continent and scarcity, would have been brought to an order of things so contrary to her commercial 
interest? Even the Americans, who traded with us, made their discount in London, and in return took 
from what they brought us English goods. 

The system of colonial goods will have gained much in this new arrangement; Beet sugar and 
pastel will not be lost, since the advantage of these crops is in the right paid by sugar and pastel from 
abroad. 

But if the good that will result from these measures for France is easy to grasp, it is not so much 
to appreciate justly what in'®* 


168 


Page 169 


will be the effect for England. This will do no good to England, neither for her manufactures, nor for 
brokerage, nor for freight; that will do him good only as an outlet for these commodities; some of these 
commodities belong to Holland and France. This will undoubtedly be good for him, but it will bring 
about a revolution in England; and will this good be less or stronger than for France? 

If things are established as we have just said, we think that the good of France would be as 3, and 
that of England as 1; and if it is not so, it is because the measure can not receive its execution. 

If, after the knowledge of this system, England adheres to it, it will find it more difficult by the 
spite and disappointment of seeing the activity of our manufactures, the product of our customs, greater 
than by the effect of the continental system. 

His Majesty considers this not as a change of system, but as his sequel. The system was war, the 
result is victory. 

By the way, did we say that we would no longer receive sugar, coffee, indigo? No, because we 
were content to establish a right. It was up to England to provide us with it and we have never been able 
to think that our navigation and catches could feed us; but we have said that we should receive these 
commodities only against French soil products, with a very considerable right; that we would only let 
them arrive on our buildings and with our licenses. So it was the perfected system that produced this 
result that was only hoped for in a few years. 

One feels that the system as it has been established is a permanent system, which can be 
perpetual: one can always give one's wine, one's silks, against objects that one does not have; to give 
them, not as the disadvantageous treaty of Versailles, as a consequence of the similarities of units of 
commodities, and thus putting in competition a consumption of 30 millions of men with a of 10 
millions, but by a calculation where the value is multiplied by the quantity, and not appreciated by one 
of its elements. 

Any treaty or stipulation under which one receives the sugar against the silk, or tariff against 
tariff, as in the treaty of Versailles, would be a treaty of 1 against 7. 

Thus we do good to England, no doubt; but we do him the good that we can not prevent, and we 

receives the triple: it would be a bad combination to refuse 3 to 1.'° 





169 


Page 170 


At present it would be idle to consider whether this system will take place; you have to try it. As 
we have been consistent, as we use only licenses, when the license has expired everything fits into 
common law; thus, if that does not succeed, the measure will be established only in the minutes of the 
council. Nothing will prove better the real inferiority of England, and how the decrees of Berlin and 
Milan, supported by victories on the continent, have brought a great result. 

We go to the means of execution. 

It would be given more than two kinds of licenses. The licenses of the first kind would be for 
importation of corn, rice, etc., which is due to the circumstances of the year; they would not be subject 
to any kind of condition. The licenses of the second kind would contain permission to import such 
quantity of sugar, coffee, etc., into Nantes and Bordeaux, as against wines and spirits; in the North, 
against silk for a third, the canvases of Cambrai, the linens and other goods of this kind. 

Each license would be for a trip; a trader could take two or three, if he wanted to, because the 
whole of the licenses would include the whole system, that is to say all the sugar recognized as 
necessary, coffee, etc. 

The system, once established on these bases, may be susceptible of modifications and 
developments. 

For France and Italy, as it is money which will enter into our coffers, it is immaterial that the 
right is perceived by the French or Italian customs; 

2. For Naples, it is not the same thing. 

3. The princes of the Confederation have no ports; they must receive the sugar by Hamburg. It 
would be necessary, by a treaty with each of them, that they should receive nothing from Prussia or 
Austria, and they would be given a bonus. Thus, if the duty is 30 cents, ten of them will be given to them 
by the customs channel; the princes would find a considerable profit, without their people noticing it. 
For example, as Grand Duke of Berg, continental law does not render anything to His Majesty; she 
knows that in this capacity it would be nice to receive 600,000 francs, which would be the share 
produced by the consumption of this country. The king of Westphalia draws nothing from his 
continental right, and if he is offered 2 or 3 millions, as well as Saxony and Bavaria, they will regard this 
treaty as advantageous. 

As for the court of Vienna, we would let him transit through Trieste!” 


170 


Page 171 


and it will be supplied by putting a transit fee equal to the continental right: 20 sous for Austria, for 
example, and 10 sous for France; it would always be for the latter a beautiful right perceived on a 
population of 15 million consumers. 

In Naples, we will proceed in the same manner; the colonial commodities will enter only on 
French licenses, France will take on the right 50 per cent; there will be so much for the King; it will be a 
consumption duty of 50 per cent on the kingdom, and, as the good state of the King's finances is of 
importance to his Majesty, she will be glad that he would be 50 per cent, in the licenses for Naples. His 
Majesty could allow the exportation of some manufactures of the country. It will be necessary to subject 
Prussia to the same system. 

These two powers, who can no longer receive colonial goods, will receive them; they will have 
half the right, and their manufactures will have an export, but it will be only on French licenses, which 
will limit them. 

Here is how we could do the series: 

Hamburg, Bremen, Lubeck, would form a first series; Amsterdam, another, second series; 
Ostend, Dunkirk, a third; Le Havre, Caen, a fourth; Granville, St. Malo, Morlaix, Redon, Quimper, a 
fifth; Nantes, La Rochelle, Bordeaux, Bayonne, a sixth; Marseilles, This, Nice, a seventh; Savona and 
Genoa, an eighth; Livorno, Civita-Vecchia, a ninth; Trieste, a tenth; Kingdom of Italy: Venice and 
Ancona, an eleventh; Kingdom of Naples: Naples, a twelfth; Mecklenburg: Rostock and Wismar, a 
thirteenth; Prussia: a series. 

The series of Naples, Prussia, and Mecklenburg, will be formed last; we have to wait for these 
countries to ask for licenses. 

Importation is a simple thing: sugar, coffee, cocoa, are needed in all these countries; tea in 
Holland. It is necessary to know which are the countries where the indigos must be directed, etc. 

As for the export, it must vary: that of Bordeaux and Bayonne would be established mainly on 
the wines and spirits; In addition to this, it will be possible to export everything that is not forbidden. 
Holland will be able to export its cheese, but the surplus in other commodities will not count in the 
export balance. 

In all this system Danzig remains; he supplies the colonial commodities to Poland; it must be 
made a series apart; the export would be in wood construction. Then comes the question of wheat: 
Poland 


171 


Page 172 


he needs this exportation, and the commerce of Danzig requires the exportation of grain for England, 
and it is very important to drive one out of every two cargoes to France; we could see if this is 
practicable. It would be advisable also to see what right could be placed on the wheats exported from 
Danzig. Thus the importation of colonial commodities could supply all Poland; and the right is not 
strong enough to prevent the Poles from stocking it. 

The Minister of the Interior will make a report in which he will draw up the table of goods to be 
imported and exported. This report will be included in a council to be held on Friday. 

According to the copy. Archives of Agriculture, Commerce and Public Works. 


18432. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. January 13, 1812. 


My son, we should form a company of sailors of the Italian guard, which would be composed of 
three officers, seven or eight masters and counter-masters and a hundred good sailors who can serve us 
for the passage of a great river or lake and for the repair of a bridge. This company would be following 
the guard, and the sailors would also be the service of gunners, They would be armed with rifles, like the 
sailors of the Imperial Guard, 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18433. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. January 13, 1812. 


My Son, the Minister of War will have sent you orders for the observation corps of Italy, and I 
suppose that in the first days of February everything will be on the march. 

It is necessary to regulate the military organization of the kingdom of Italy. 1 Who will 
command in chief? 2"? Who will command the place of Palmanova, those of Ancona, Mantua? 3" Will 
these places be armed and in a state of defense? The absence of the army entails the obligation of their 
armament. 4" Will they be supplied? The absence of the army also implies the obligation to supply these 
places. Give me a report on that. All this must be done successively and without shaking, 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S, A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. ve 





172 


Page 173 


18434.-TO THE MOLLIEN COUNTY, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 14, 1812. 


Count Mollien, it is my intention that, from the 1st of March, the accounts of the Grand Army 
will begin, and that all the payments of pay will be made in the hands of its payers; present me the 
project that the experiment has proved to be the most suitable for the organization of the service of the 
treasure. 

This is the organization of the Grand Army: 

The Prince of Eckmiihl, commander of the observation corps of the Elbe, has under his 
command the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th divisions and two brigades of light cavalry. 

The Duke of Reggio will command the 6th, 8th and 9th Divisions and two light cavalry brigades; 
it will be returned on February 15 in Miinster. 

The Marshal Duke of Elchingen will command the 10th, 11th, and 7th Divisions; the first two 
will be in Diisseldorf and Mainz; the 7th division is already in Danzig. He will also have two brigades of 
light cavalry under his command. 

The observation corps of Italy, which will be in Bolzano, Trento and Verona, will be composed 
of the 13th and 14th divisions, which will be French, and the 15th division, which will be Italian. 

The reserve cavalry will be divided into three corps, namely: a division of light cavalry and two 
divisions of cuirassiers, forming the Ist corps; 

A division of light cavalry and two divisions of cuirassiers and carabineers, forming the 2nd 
corps; 

A division of light cavalry, a division of cuirassiers and a division of dragoons, forming the 3rd 
corps. 

Each corps will have a common park; each of the three cavalry reserve corps will have a park. 

Finally, the Imperial Guard, infantry, cavalry, artillery, etc., will be part of the army. 

You need a payer by division. Is it advisable to have a payer per corps, or is it better for division 
payers to have their direct accounts with the paymaster-general? This is what experience alone can make 
known, 

It will be necessary that you present to my signature the appointment of the paymaster general, 
and that this payer be on February 15 in Mainz, where will be supposed to be the general headquarters. 
Take action from the beginning to avoid embarrassment in this accounting. '” 





173 


Page 174 


You will take care that the paymaster general has the number of hitched boxes necessary to transport his 
funds, 
You must regard this letter as very secret and as not to leave your hands. I have thought fit to 
write it to you so that you can stop, on the bases it contains, the best organization. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18435. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTHE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 14, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I send you a report from the Minister of War Administration on the standards. 
You will see that he has not understood my decree of December 25th, and that he thinks he will have to 
make new eagles, while these are merely standards for adaptation. I am taking a decree to charge you 
now with the attribution. This will pass to the budget on various expenses of your department. Mind 
you, I do not want eagles or sticks; that by my decree I only wish that the standard to be fastened to the 
eagles be made. The eagle will not change; but, nevertheless, it will always look good, because the 
standard will be renewed every three years. It will be something imposing that an eagle whose battles 
can be cited. This is the advantage of having a sign for something that has a body. It is necessary for the 
fabric to choose a double silk tight and have it embroidered with care. Do not look at the price. Have 
them first made for the regiments that make up the Grande Armée. Have the battles where the body is, 
and one sent on the 1st of March. 

Make an order to the army based on this decree. Recommend that the pennants which the 
colonels give to the battalions should not be given anything, so that if, unfortunately, they should fall 
into the hands of the enemy, it will be seen from their extreme simplicity that it is without consequence. 
The eagle alone must receive honors. The pennant must not even be deposited with the battalion 
commander; he must stay at the NCO who wears it. 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war.'”4 





174 


Page 175 


18436. - NOTE TO THE COUNT DARU, 
MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE, PARIS. 
Paris. January 14, 1812. 


I do not approve of putting 600 pounds of weight in a large ambulance caisson, while 1,500 can 
be put. Count Daru will let me know how the load of one of the four caissons which follow is composed, 
and he will compare this load with the one proposed. I wish to attach to my decree an indicative state of 
the loading of the caissons. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by Count Daru. 


18437. - TO GENERAL DUROC, DUKE OF FRIULI, 
GRAND MARSHAL OF THE PALACE, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 14, 1812. 


The Duke of Friuli, I send you the apostille that I have put on the sidelines of a request for 
additional staffing for the Duke of Padua. 

It is not customary to give supplements when the endowments are not successful. 

Independently of the price of his house, which you estimate at 400,000 francs, I will give him, on 
the occasion of his marriage, 200,000 francs; it will be six hundred and so many thousand francs that it 
will cost me extraordinary. He can make his arrangements on that. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Finance Archives. 


18438. -NOTE 
DICTATED IN COUNCIL OF MINISTERS. 
Palace of Tuileries, January 15, 1812. 


His Majesty thinks that an extraordinary cut should be made of all the elm, walnut, and other 
woods necessary for guns and other artillery, so as to supply the arsenals for four years, and 
extraordinary cut for palisades. These cuts would be made in such a way that the Minister of Finance 
would receive the amount, and that the artillery henceforth would not spend more money for this object 
and would be supplied. 

His Majesty turns his attention to the wooden cups for the navy. Here is how it is done:'” 





175 


Page 176 


The officer of the navy hammer; the forestry officer puts the acre in adjudication, with the 
condition of giving to the navy, for a fixed price, so many marked trees (in this price is the condition of 
the transport of these trees until Ruelle), and that the successful tenderer must receive there from the 
navy only by cubic feet. As is usually the case, this coin is worth more (and it is a vice in the forest 
administration system, because the same price should be paid to the navy as to an individual, with a 
reduction of 20 or 40 per cent. ), it follows that the naval officer agrees with the contractor who buys his 
tree. The naval officer, if he is not faithful, declares a marked wood not proper to the navy, and receives 
a gratuity for that declaration, It is a loss for the Estate and for the Navy. If, on the contrary, the wood 
was given to the navy for nothing, the purchaser would receive, by his specifications, the obligation to 
cut off the marked trees and to drive them to Ruelle, and, if the navy did not take them , the purchaser 
would become the owner) for a cubage at such price; therefore he would have no interest in not 
delivering them; or it would be obliged to cut, and if the navy did not take them, these woods would 
belong to the administration, which would sell them by a new auction. It could also have the advantage 
that in the woods rejected by the navy, artillery and engineering could take what would be convenient 
for them. His Majesty, therefore, thinks that a change is necessary in this respect, because, on the other 
hand, the forest administration is making very high the damage done to it by the hammering of the navy. 

One feels that there is some inaccuracy in this way of operating. 

A bidder bids an acre where there are two marked trees; they are supposed to be good: if they are 
refused) it is clear that the successful bidder wins; so this chance is favorable to him. If he then increases 
this chance by a bribe, there is only a series of abuses. On the connection that, when the successful 
tenderer makes his bid on the principle that the marked woods do not belong to him, he will not be 
interested; he will be obliged to the transport, then he will remove from the price of the acre the value of 
the marked woods and the expenses of their transport. The navy does not take these woods, it is a new 
adjudication. 

To return to the question, the navy does not have the means, for its officers, to cut the woods; the 
forest administration can not do it either. An error made in the forest of Fontainebleau has given rise to 
many cisoners. There is therefore no other way than the adjudication. We should hammer the woods, 
and 


176 


Page 177 


the invitation would designate the contractors who would be in charge of cutting and driving the timber 
reserves to Ruelle; it would be a simple adjudication of labor. If the navy refused the woods, it would be 
a special sale by auction. 

According to the copy. Finance Archives. 


18439. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, January 15, 1812. 


My Cousin, I receive your statements of situation at the time of ... December. Do not delay to 
send me those of January Ist; we are at 15, I should have them already. 

You must have received the order to return to France the 3rd, 4th and 5th battalions of the 127th, 
keeping only the Ist and 2nd battalions, with the artillery company, and completing them with the men 
of the last three battalions. You must have received the same order for the 128th. 

I see in the situation of the observation corps the 4th battalion of the 19th, worn as being in the 
department of Lippe and not to be part of the observation corps: I do not understand that. The 4th 
battalion of the 19th, those of the 16th, of the 123rd, must be at Magdeburg; have them run there. I can 
not see with difficulty that the 4th battalion of the 46th has only 600 men. 

At the division of cuirassiers Saint-Germain, I see only a brigadier general: did Brigadier 
General Bessiéres not arrive there? 

I find the sick of the corps numerous, since the number is 10,000, independently of 4,000 for the 
regimental infirmaries and the chamber; which makes 11,000 patients. Let me know where these 
patients are, hospital by hospital. I have always noticed that there is a very great difference between the 
number of patients accused of the corps and the number of the administration. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18440. - TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, January 16th, 1812. 
Monsieur le Duke de Bassano, I send you a convention (1) 





1) The Convention with the Grand Duke of Hesse-Darmstadt, stipulating the purchase by! ”” 





177 


Page 178 


concluded by Mr Defermon. Finally, it is necessary to fix some idea on this nature of acts. He is 
absolutely against the principles which I treat and stipulate with a foreign prince without it being 
through the channel of my Minister of Foreign Affairs. It is true that if the Prince of Darmstadt had to 
buy from me a property, he would do so before a notary and according to the forms of the Civil Code. 
Take a closer look at this question and propose one of these two parties: or treat these cases by 
convention by passing them through your department, or by settling the stipulations by the forms and 
officers of the civil order. In this case, my signature would be useless, since my Intendant General has 
my powers for all civil contracts. See what would be most suitable for my service. 
NAPOLEON 
From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18441. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTHE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 16, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, show my discontent to the Major of the Ile de Ré Regiment that the two 
companies of the 3rd Battalion of this regiment, 400 strong, are uneducated, that they have no booklets 
neither of ordinary notebooks, and of the fact that these men live as laborers and not as soldiers. Write to 
this major that he has to make a quick change to this false method. 

Order the Inspector of the 12th Military Division to review the corps on the Isle of Re and ensure 
that the books are in good condition. 

You will give the following orders: 1“, that the 3rd and 4th battalions of the 29th light, each of 
1,000 men, who are on the Isle of Re, leave on the 1st of February for Paris; 2" that the Ist and 2nd 
battalions of the regiment of the Isle of Re, which are at Brest, leave on the 21st of January for Paris. 

You will charge the colonel of the 29th Light to proceed to Belle-Ile, to review the depots of his 
regiment, and, if he judges that the 300 men of the 5th Battalion are sufficiently exercised and 
disciplined. 





this prince of various estates situated in the principality of Hanau, and which had been ceded to the 
Emperor in the year 1810, to be united in the extraordinary domain, re 


178 


Page 179 


to make a movement, to make leave all the deposit for Paris. It will be advisable, however, that the 
inveterate deserters and bad subjects of this 5th Battalion be withdrawn and placed in the regiment of 
Belle-Ile, which will replace them with good subjects, and complete this battalion at 560 men. By this 
means the five battalions of the 29th light would arrive at Paris at the same time, which might give the 
hope of putting this regiment of the line beyond the Rhine to more than 2,400 men. 

You will present to me a draft decree, if this decree does not exist, so that any individual of the 
3rd, 4th and 5th battalions of this regiment who desert on the way be condemned to death, as if he were 
deserting the enemy. If this law has already been passed, you will send it to the colonel, and order the 
generals commanding the 12th and 13th military divisions to have it put in order and to supervise its 
execution. The first deserter to be captured will have to be shot among his comrades. 

The 4th Battalion of the 29th Light will leave three days after the 3rd Battalion; and if the 
desertion was too great, the general commanding the 12th division would be allowed to keep the 4th 
battalion. 

This general will be ordered to release from the 3rd and 4th battalions all the native men of the 
12th and 22nd military divisions, and the 13th and Ist; he will put them in the regiment of the Isle of Re, 
and have them replaced by others. 

Before leaving, the captains will have each soldier sign his word of honor that he will not desert; 
it will be the day after this operation that they will be made known to the decree which condemns the 
deserters to death. 

All the men who would be sick, inconvenienced or sickly at the moment of departure, will be 
retained and incorporated into the regiment of the Isle of Re, which will replace them with strong and 
healthy men. Once the battalions of the 29th come out of the island, all the men who have remained 
malingres will be struck off the duties of this regiment and carried on those of the regiment of the Isle of 
Re, and, in general, no one will be allowed to go out of the regiment of the Isle of Re no man, under the 
pretext of joining the 29th light, when this regiment will not be on the island. You will order the 
magazine inspector to re-establish the force a few days after the departure of the 29th Battalions. 

The 4th battalion of the 10th light and the 4th battalion of the Walcheren regiment will be ready 
to leave each other on the 10th of February. The same arrangements will be made and the same 
precautions will be taken for these two battalions. They will also head to Paris.'” 





179 


Page 180 


The same precautions will be taken for the 4th company of sappers of the island of Elba, which 
will leave January 28 from the Isle of Ré to go to Paris. Recommend to the general who commands the 
division that, if he deserts somebody, he should make one catch up with him and have him shot, taking 
care that the knowledge of his sentence is given on the Isle of Re. 

Order the two companies of sappers of the island of Elba who are in Porto-Ferrajo to go away on 
February Ist, to go to Verona. You will prescribe the same precautions and the same measures as for the 
4th company. 

Order the company of the battalion of sappers of the island of Elba which is at Relie -Ile to leave 
for Paris, and prescribe the same dispositions as for the other companies. 

The two companies of sappers of the island of Elbe which are on the island of Ré and Belle-Lle 
will meet in Paris, so that, when the observation corps of Italy will be reunited, this battalion of sappers 
can join him. 

I have to order movements which are in a hurry for the 5th and 7th battalions of the 6th line, for 
the 5th and 7th battalions of the 14th light, for the 1st and 3rd battalion of the 1st regiment of the 
Mediterranean, which are at the Elba Island. I wish to pass these battalions on the continent; I need to 
know which departments are the men who compose them, how they are dressed and what their situation 
is. 

Make me the same report on the battalions of the regiment of the Mediterranean which are in 
Corsica, so that I can give orders so that the part of these troops which I need speaks on February Ist to 
go to Verona. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18442. - IN THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGHAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, January 16, 1812. 


My cousin, it is my intention that as of February Ist, you begin to act as Major General of the 
Grand Army. Have the ministers of war and the administration of war hand over all the necessary 
information, and give me, from the 20th to the 25th of January, the state of the movements for the 
formation of the army, by making me know where the troops will be'*° 





180 


Page 181 


from June 30 to February 15, my intention being for the army to be in position by February 15 and ready 
to move. It is advisable that your crews, those of your staff, and those belonging to the general 
headquarters, be assembled from February 15th to March Ist in Mainz. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war, 


To M. GAUDIN, DUKE OF GAETE, 
MINISTER OF FINANCE, PARIS. 
Paris, January 11, 1812, 


Duke of Gaéte, between Brienne and Rosnay there is an avenue planted with three hundred elms 
belonging to the Domain, which is said to be at the point where they can be felled, It would be an 
important resource for artillery, engineering and for the park of Sampigny. Let me know if there would 
be any inconvenience in cutting down these trees. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Finance Archives, 


18444, - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IN PARIS, 
Paris, January 19, 1812, 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I refer you the case of Sweden. You will represent me on Thursday the 
draft note to Mr. de Osshon (1). This note is too hot; she is not calm enough, not conciliatory enough; 
there is no need for a hare, so let her do the drowning; make it sweeter, be sincere, and especially that it 
be much shorter. Besides, if he speaks to you, no answer. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Archives of Foreign Affairs. 





1) In the note to be given to the representative of the Government of Sweden, the Duke of Bassano, Minister of Foreign 
Relations of France, was to explain the reasons which had decided the Emperor to occupy Swedish Pomerania by the troops 
under the orders of the Prince of Eckmiihl: not only was English contraband tolerated in Swedish Pomerania, but recent 
events had proved that Sweden was herself an active part of it.'*! 





181 


Page 182 


18445. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER. OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 19, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, you have given the command of the Apennine Department to Adjutant 
Commander Bourmont, that is, to a former chouan chief. This measure is ridiculous. This officer should 
not be employed, or at least employed only so as to be supervised. What do you think my troops think of 
being commanded by such a man? 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18446. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER. OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 19, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I do not approve the departure of the 250 men of the 5th Light Infantry Regiment 
of Cherbourg for Osnabriick. Order this detachment to return to Cherbourg. This movement is a 
misfortune: this detachment composed of refractory conscripts and refractory Calvados; it will have 
poisoned the country. Since we do not remember anything in the war offices, I would have to send the 
minute of the orders before sending them. These 250 men will be replaced by men drawn from the 
nearest regiments. 
NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18447. - TO MARECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Paris, January 19, 1812. 


Cousin, as soon as you are sure to seize a large quantity of colonial goods in Swedish Pomerania, 
you will take possession of this province, and you will seize, either at Stralsund or at Anklam, finally on 
all points of Pomerania everything that is found there is colonial merchandise. 

You will give your divisions the following direction: the 4th Division, having its headquarters at 
Stettin, will continue to occupy Stettin, Kustrin and Glogau; the 2nd division will go to Pomerania; the 
3rd Division will proceed to Stettin, where its headquarters will meet; '* 


182 


Page 183 


it will be available to carry everywhere; the Ist Division will remain at Hamburg, a brigade will go to 
Rostock, and in case of an event it will be ready to meet at the 5th Division; the 5th division will meet 
entirely around Magdeburg; the 7th division will continue to stay in Danzig. 

As soon as I have designated the corps which is to raise the 127th to Cuxhaven, this regiment 
will join its division. 

I attach great importance to your divisions being well united. 

Order that the 3rd, 4th and 5th battalions of the 127th and 128th, after pouring all available men 
into the first two battalions, go to France. 

In the first half of February, the 6th Division will be organized in Osnabriick, the 8th in Miinster 
and the 9th in Nijmegen. The Ist light cavalry brigade is in Danzig; the second will meet at Stettin. It is 
fitting that General Jaoquinot leaves the command of the place where he is to follow his brigade. 
General Bruyere, with the Ist Light Cavalry Division, which is composed of the 3rd and 4th Brigades, 
will move to Pomerania with the Friant division. The 3rd light cavalry brigade and your three cuirassier 
divisions will not move from where they are. The Friant division, the Gudin division, the Dessaix 
division, the light cavalry division of General Bruyere, and the 2nd light cavalry brigade will soon reach 
Danzig and join the Ist Light Cavalry Brigade. in the time daughter the Ist and 5th Infantry Division, 
the three divisions of heavy cavalry and the 5th Light Cavalry Brigade would be in your hand to carry 
on Berlin and wherever it is needed, shining supported by the Saxons and the Westphalians. It is, 
however, fitting that the 5th Light Cavalry Brigade, which is destined for the 2nd Corps of the Elbe, 
does not move. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmithl. 


18448. - DECISION. 
Paris, January 21, 1812. 








The Count de Montesquiou, Grand Returned to the Duke of Friuli to bring this 
Chamberlain, informs the Emperor of the sum to those which are at his disposal for the 
distress issue in which the composer Zinuarelli | month of January. 
is in Paris. The sum of six thousand francs 
would be necessary for this artist. 











NAPOLEON 
From the original. Imperial Library. ee 





183 


Page 184 


18449. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. January 22, 1812. 


My son, you will find attached a decree ordering the formation of a battalion of military crews 
drawn by oxen, who will be trained in Verona without delay. Do not waste a moment for the formation 
of this battalion; name them the frames. Take to fill them with Italians accustomed to driving oxen. This 
battalion must be ready to leave on the Ist of March. The kingdom of Italy has many oxen; it is a means 
of using them. By this means, my kingdom of Italy will supply five hundred wagons to the army. 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy comm. by S.A.I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18450. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 24, 1812, 


Count de Cessac, I deem it proper to inform you of my entire intentions as to the military crews 
of the Grand Army. My intention is to have the 12th, 2nd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th French battalions, a 
battalion of the kingdom of Italy and one of the Imperial Guard, total, eight battalions, hitching 2,016 
wings; four battalions of Comtois cars, hitching 2,424 wagons; four battalions drawn by oxen, composed 
of 1,224 wagons; a battalion of ox-carriages from the Kingdom of Italy, hitching 306 wagons; total 
general, seventeen battalions hitching nearly 6,000 wagons and carrying from 110 to 120,000 quintals, 
namely: the eight battalions of crews, 30 quintals each car; battalions of wagons in the Comtoise, 12 
quintals, and battalions of carts drawn by oxen, 20 quintals; total, 114,000 quintals, which would make a 
million rations of flour, or for an army of 200,000 men for nearly two months. The decree I have taken 
today for the formation of the 14th and 15th battalions, and the 20th and 21st, and for the provision by 
conscription of men for all the battalions, provides for all these needs. Those of those battalions who 
would remain behind, if the army made a movement, would be used to wear the clothing effects of the 
convoys destined to leave on the 15th of March and the Ist of April. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war. '*4 





184 


Page 185 


18451. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 24, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I write you the letter for you alone. I want her not to come out of 
your hands, so that the contents remain completely secret. 

My intention is, when the conscription of 1812 is gone and at the moment when the war will be 
declared, that is towards the end of March, to raise 120,000 men, under the title of first ban of the 
National Guard. These 120,000 men would be taken from the conscriptions of 1809, 1810, 1811, and 
1812, which remitted 30,000 men by conscription. The senatus-consulte would give them the assurance 
of not leaving the frontiers of France, but they should serve for as long as the war would last. This lifting 
will be done quickly, because the men would remain in the localities, the Dutch in Holland, the 
Flemings in Flanders, the Britons in Brittany. I suppose then that in April and May I will need all that is 
necessary for the clothing of these 120,000 men. It would be advisable to take some precautions now to 
have sheets. These 120,000 men would not actually move from within, in order to have the guarantee of 
the tranquility and inviolability of the territory during the war. I will probably train from these 120,000 
men one hundred and twenty battalions. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war 


18452. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGHAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS 
Paris, January 25, 1812. 


Cousin, you will write to General Reille that I give him the command of the Army of the Ebro. It 
will be composed of four active divisions: 1° its own; 24 the Palombini division; 3 Severoli division; 
4"" the Frére division, which he will organize with the Ist light infantry, 14th, 115th and 5th line. 

From the moment that it occupies with its active army the countries around Barcelona, the 
garrison of this place will be quite strong with the depots, the regiment of Nassau, two battalions of the 
23rd line, two battalions of the 18th light, four artillery companies, sappers and miners. 

With these four divisions, he must definitely submit the entire’ : 





Page 186 


low Catalonia, maintain peace in Aragon and be able to take care of the organization of this country. 
You will find attached the decree by which Catalonia is organized in four departments; you will 
send a copy to General Reille. 
The cavalry of General Reille will be composed of the 9th hussars, the regiment of the Italian 
royal hunters, the regiment of the Napoleon dragons, the 24th of dragoons. 
NAPOLEON 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18453. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris, January 26, 1812. 


My son, I dismissed ....., my charge d'affaires in Naples. I order him to go to Paris to report on 
his conduct. If he is as guilty as appearances make him believe, I will make a harsh example of this to 
teach my ministers that they must not separate themselves from my cause to follow their passions and 
their interests. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18454. -OBSERVATIONS 
DICTATES IN ADVICE OF BRIDGES AND PAVEMENTS. 
Palace of the Tuileries, January 21, 1812. 


Of all the communications from the Baltic to the Rhine, the best, the shortest, the most 
economic, is the sea. But, the sea being forbidden by superior forces, thence arises the idea and comes 
the necessity of an internal communication from the Baltic to the Rhine, The first idea that presents itself 
is to leave Hamburg, to go down the Elbe, to follow the Wadden to Delfzyl. It is true that this navigation 
is only good for vessels drawing four feet of water, and that this navigation, like the first, has the 
disadvantage of being intercepted by the enemy. 

So the most natural idea is to go down the Elbe to Cuxhaven, and join the Elbe with the Weser to 
Bremerlehe via a side channel without locks. 

The navigation from Hamburg to Cuxhaven can be practiced by huge buildings, as well as that of 
Cuxhaven to the Weser by *6 





186 


Page 187 


the canal; at Bremerlehe we would take the new canal, which would lead to Delfxyl, 

This project has not been studied; it was for want of positive information that the Emperor had 
adopted the proposed project of a canal passing through the Oste. Here there is a sharing of water, which 
is always a difficult thing. It is true that the Oste is navigable as far as Bremerwoede, where it would be 
necessary to break the load as far as the Weser. 

Thus the Emperor does not stop this project until it has been studied. From next year the project 
will be made for the joining of the Elbe to the Weser, and the point will be determined where the canal 
will join the Elbe. The Emperor will be proposed with the appointment of a joint commission of land 
engineers, naval officers, and highway engineers to determine this project. 

The first point is to have the work of Mr. Beautemps-Beaupré checked by a commission of naval 
and engineering officers; the second, to determine the point where the basin will be made, since the 
vessels engaged in the Elbe might perish by the ice; we must ensure the possibility of establishing the 
basin in the location to be designated; third point: two forts are necessary on the right and on the left of 
this great establishment, in order to be always master of 2,000 toises of harbor, and then one would 
establish along the sea, with 7 or 800 toises, a fort like the fort Lasalle of the Helder, costing about a 
million, or 1,000,000, 500 men could sustain a very long siege, because one can be attacked only by the 
dikes. 

If this work could be studied by April, we could start this fort in the next campaign and have it in 
the year, known Fort Lasalle. 

The Minister of the Navy will hold a council where General Haxo, MM. Tarbé, Blanken, 
Sganzin, Cachin and Beautemps-Beaupré, to make a first project that will be submitted to His Majesty, 
and then we will send on the spot to study the land. 

According to the copy. Naval Archives. 


18455. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGHAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF SPAIN, PARIS. 
Paris, 2, January 1812. 


Cousin, write to General Dorsenne tonight that I receive news of the English movement on 
Ciudad Rodrigo; that I strongly agree that in this circumstance he delays'*” 


187 


Page 188 


the march of the Guard, to support the Duke of Ragusa with all his might; that General Montbrun should 
not delay in arriving, since Marshal Suchet sent to meet him to make him retrograde, and that he had to 
march on the 11th to return to Madrid; that I expect that on the 18th of January General Montbrun will 
have been able to return to Madrid, and be in line at the end of the month; that when he arrives, the army 
of Portugal will have taken his final position; that the English movement appears to have been 
undertaken to divert the siege of Valencia, and because they have become acquainted with the strong 
detachment which the army of Portugal had made; and that my desire to have my Guard is not so urgent 
that it must be dismissed before affairs have taken a natural position in the North. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18456. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTHIE, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 27, 1812. 


Cousin, report to me on the staff of my Guard. I begin with the Polish light horse: General 
Krasinski is the colonel. I have appointed Brigadier-General Konopka, who has long commanded a 
regiment of lancers to the army of the south of Spain, who is the second major? The 2nd regiment of 
light lancers is commanded by General Colbert; there is, I believe, a Dutch major; who is the second 
major? can I trust the Dutch major? 

General Guyot commands the chasseurs on horseback; Colonel Lion is one of the majors; I 
appointed General Exelmans Major in this regiment. Daumesnil being wounded can not remain major; it 
is necessary to report to me on this officer, that my intention is to employ militarily. Could we not give 
him the command of Vincennes, with a higher rank and a good salary? Vincennes being a state prison 
and one of the quarters of my Guard, I need a reliable man. 

General Saint-Sulpice commands the dragons; Colonel Letort is one of the majors; I do not know 
the second; make me a report that lets me know ... 

General Walther commands my grenadiers on horseback; Generals Lepic and Chastel are majors. 

General Lepic would like to be made general of division and to go'** 





188 


Page 189 


to order a big cavalry division? As my grenadiers rarely charge, he would gain experience in the line, 
and I could then call him to the grenadier command when General Walther would withdraw. I only want 
to do what is right for him. See him and tell him about it as coming from you. 

General Chastel is given talent; the command of a cavalry brigade would give him experience; I 
will also do only that which will suit him. 

I would like to place as Major in one of my Guard's cavalry regiments, General Ornano, who, 
having always been with the army, will gain in my Guard a confidence which will be useful to him; I 
will place it after that in the line. 

If Generals Lepic and Chastel passed in the line, what brigade generals or colonels could I name 
majors in the grenadiers? 

I move to the infantry. General Dorsenne being General-in-Chief must now follow his career; I 
wish to appoint a general of division to replace him in my Guard. 

Let me know if I have enough generals and colonels to command all the rest of my Guard. 

NAPOLEON 
From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria. 


18457. - TO THE COUNT DARU, 
MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE, PARIS. 
Paris. January 27, 1812. 


Count Daru, would it be inconvenient to prescribe by decree that the ambulance caisson of the 
regiments will wear two mattresses matching the caisson, with their blankets, four half-supplies, which 
would give something to sleep 12 men , twelve stretcher girdles, amputation caisson, 100 kilograms of 
lint, 125 kilograms of bandage, line of drugs weighing at least 5 kilograms? which would make for all 
the regiments an increase of means of dressings which would be very considerable. 

Could it not be prescribed also that the four ambulance caissons of the divisions would each 
carry at least ten stretcher girdles, two amputation caisson, etc.? 

Represent me that with your report. 

NAPOLEON 


From the known copy. by Count Daru.'®” 


Page 190 


18458. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
A CASSEL. 
Paris. January 27, 1812. 


Brother, various indications had long made me fear that the Emperor of Russia would have 
ceased to be in the sentiments of Tilsit. A ukase, published in December, 1810, injured the interests of 
France and the Confederation chiefly; it was advantageous to England; it was against the Tilsit treaty. 
However, I had abstained from any kind of complaint, confining myself to friendly representations. At 
Blois the following April, the Emperor of Russia had his ministers at the various courts issue a protest 
relative to the Oldenburg. I must have been all the more astonished at so singular a step that, anticipating 
the wishes of Russia, I had, from the beginning, offered a proper indemnity for the Duke de Oldenburg. 
I thought only of repeating this offer. As Russia did not appear to approve the object proposed for 
compensation, I urged her to make known what she desired. Finally, I put everything in use to stop the 
consequences of a public act which, although it spoke of the preservation of the alliance, naturally had to 
make succeed the mistrust of the good harmony which had reigned between the two courts. Instead of 
explaining itself, Russia weakened her army of the Danube, evacuated the right of this river, removed 
from Finland part of the troops which occupied the province so recently conquered, and gathered all her 
available forces on the frontiers of the Duchy of Warsaw. 

The territory of the Confederation was thus threatened, so much so that I was obliged to demote 
the troops of the duchy on the Vistula, in order to be able to support them in the event of a sudden 
attack. From the commencement of these Russian movements, my first care had been to provide for the 
defense of Danzig, which is one of the boulevards of the Confederation, and to render the garrison 
respectable; which milks me in the case of requiring then part of the contingents and writing for this 
purpose to your Majesty, who sent one of his regiments into that place. 

Shortly thereafter, a Brazilian envoy, transported on an English frigate, was received at St. 
Petersburg as minister of a friendly power, though, under the alliance of Tilsit, Russia must be in a state 
of war with the House of Braganza. I desired peace; I had an interest in preserving it, since a part of my 
troops was in Spain; but, when Russia supported the violation of the treaties by the apparatus of arms, I 
had to resort also to arms.'”° 


190 


Page 191 


This precaution is more than justified today by the extraordinary lifting of 4 men out of 500, which has 
just been ordered throughout the whole of the Russian empire, without Russia having explained itself on 
its protest or on its ukase without her troops having left the positions she had made them take in the 
vicinity of the duchy. 

I had to gather my armies, train them and restore my war material. These preparations used a 
year. Now, 300,000 men are going to cross Germany and go to the frontiers of the Confederation, not in 
hostile feelings, but for my armies to be as close to the Vistula as the Russian armies. 

When it is time for my minister to answer the protest against the Oldenburg, I will instruct: that 
the affairs of this country are really foreign to Russia; that the duke, who was required, during the last 
war, to furnish his contingent, had not done so; that, having not fulfilled the duties of a confederate, he 
had lost his rights; that, however, and for the sake of peace, I have offered him a suitable indemnity, and 
that I am still ready to give it to him. 

While adopting the principle, Russia did not say what she wanted, and I must have thought that it 
was her intention to ask Danzig and any part of the territory of the Confederation. If, indeed, she had not 
had to make proposals contrary to the treaty of Tilsit and to my principles, and that I could not hear dirty 
answer to them by the weapons, would she have armed, and since one year she would refuse to explain? 
I am far from having lost the hope of peace. But since it is admitted to me the fatal process of 
negotiating at the head of a powerful and numerous army, it is my honor to negotiate also at the head of 
a large and powerful army. I do not want to begin hostilities, but I want to put myself in a position to 
repulse them. I do not want to violate Russian territory, but I want to be ready to repent anyone who 
violates the territory of the Confederation. 

I desire, therefore, that your Majesty's contingent should meet and be ready to enter the 
campaign on February 15th. I ask her to get me the status of her contingent as general officers, staff 
officers, infantry, cavalry, artillery with caissons and crews, and as it is intended to organize. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. Prince Jerome. 

Same letter to the King of Bavaria, to the King this Wurtemberg, etc. a 





191 


Page 192 


18459. -. TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris. January 28, 1812. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, put me under the eyes of the treaty of 22 April 1809 with Nassau. I 
believe it follows from this treaty that Nassau must provide three regiments. Let me know what this 
prince has available, and whether he could supply a regiment to the next campaign. 

I would like to compose the division of princes, namely: Ist brigade: a Nassau regiment, 1,680 
men; a regiment of Prince Primate, 1,680 men (independently of 500 men he has in Spain); a Wiirzburg 
regiment, 1,680 men; total 5,040 men. 2nd brigade: the three regiments (1) as they were composed, 
namely: the 4th regiment, 2,800 men; the 5th regiment, 1,700 men; the 6th regiment, 1,500 men; total, 
6,000 men. 8th Brigade: the two regiments of Mecklenburg, 2,000 men. Grand total, 13,010 men. 

Prepare me the details of the organization of this division. Ask each regiment to have two pieces 
of regimental artillery, and make the necessary arrangements for the contingents to meet on the 20th of 
February in the respective places, so that they can leave from the 25th to the 30th, and be assembled at 
Dessau on the Ist of March. My intention is to instruct General Daendels to go to these different 
countries to unite this division and take command of it. Give me a detailed report on this part of the 
Confederation's quotas. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18460. — NOTE 
DICTATED IN ADVICE OF FORTIFICATIONS. 
Tuileries Palace. January 28, 1812. 


About Fort Tromp (Goeree Island) vis-a-vis Hellevoetsluis. His Majesty says that Fort Tromp does not 
seem to him well determined to decide to build it in its present location. The idea of Fort Tromp was to 
make the existence of ships in Flakkee harbor depend on the capture of a fort which required eight days 
of open trench, and not a few easy batteries to take. 





1 The regiments of Saxony Ducale (4th Regiment), Anhalt and Lippe (Sth), Schrwarzburg, Wuldeck and 
Reuss (6th).!”” 


192 


Page 193 


This goal seems quite well filled by Fort Tromp, which is less than 900 fathoms from Pamplis. But it is 
necessary to make on the Meuse researches like those which His Majesty had done on the Texel; for 
that, one must know the probes of the Meuse, which the navy must have. This research will reveal 
whether it is possible to anchor outside the Meuse bar. At the next council, we will present to His 
Majesty the probes of the river, and we shall call Mr. Beautemps-Beaupré, hydrographic engineer. This 
is a very important maritime issue, because if the ships could anchor out of the pass, it would be 
convenient to place the strong Tromp in such a way as to protect this outer harbor. If, on the contrary, 
we can not draw any advantage from this outer harbor, we might then consider the batteries which are at 
the tip of the island to be useless, and concentrate the whole defense in Fort Tromp, except to have only 
12 batteries to protect cabotage. 

The Schouwen Island watershed should be placed on the Grevelingen Channel, which separates 
Goeree Island from Schouwen Island; for a reduction, whatever strength it may have, is susceptible only 
to a few days of defense; if one can not come to his aid, he can only capitulate, and it is a lost garrison. 
Instead of a rifle on the canal not allowing the enemy to block it, Tholen and Bers-op-Zoom would be 
flown in to help him; if he can defend himself for eight or ten days, he is almost certain to be rescued. 

Then there must be a fort at the tip of the island of Zierickee, to defend the passage of Keete, it is 
a question of another nature. 

On the island of Goeree, we made the reduction, not to defend the passage, but to preserve a 
point where we can not be blocked; that is what determined to make Fort Duquesne; it is large enough 
that, in one night, five or six thousand men may be thrown into it and clear the whole island. This is the 
same system that must be applied to Schouwen Island. The best way to fortify an island is to facilitate 
communication: that is how, for the island of Walcheren, we had the project of making a dike on the 
Sloe. What was not practicable for this island, is for the island of Schouwen, the canal having only 3 or 
400 toises. If we can have an arrow, a bridge that reaches Tholen, and, if that is not possible, that we 
have boats insured to carry a lot of people, we will have given the greatest possible strength to 
Schouwen Island. 

According to the copy. Archives of the Navy.!”° 


13 


Page 194 


18461. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Paris, January 28, 1812. 


Cousin, I look forward to your report on the colonial goods you have found in Pomerania. You 
have no doubt sent a detachment from your customs officers. 

I intend General Damas, who commands the troops of the Grand Duchy of Berg, to command a 
division, which will consist of eight battalions of Berg, four of Hesse-Darmstadt, which will make 
twelve battalions, of a cavalry regiment. Berg and a regiment of Hessian cavalry, and finally artillery 
troops belonging to these two contingents. Two battalions of the Grand Duchy of Berg are already at 
Stettin. I ordered that three battalions, forming 2,400 men, be ready to leave for Diisseldorf under the 
orders of a brigadier general. An equal amount of troops will be ready from Hesse-Darmstadt. You can 
therefore go directly to Diisseldorf to set Berg's Brigade in motion and direct it to Hamburg, where it 
will take up your troops as soon as you have to walk further. 

Since you are entering Pomerania, it is necessary that you seal all the passages between Sweden 
and the mainland hermetically, and that, without doing anything ostensible, you put a kind of embargo 
such that nothing can enter or leave, if it is not the couriers of cabinet that the government of Sweden 
would like to send to France; but no trunk of commerce should pass. You will also stop all 
correspondence with Sweden that one would like to pass through Denmark. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18462. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris, January 28, 1812. 


My Son, arm Venice and Ancona completely on the land side and the sea side. Arm Palmanova 
and Osoppo. Arm half Mantua, Peschiera and Legnago, Do this very slowly. I approve the basics that 
you propose for the mouth supply of these places. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. ade 





194 


Page 195 


18463. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS 
Paris. January 29, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I send you a report from my orderly officer Athalin on Delfzyl. I would like you 
to give me, on next Tuesday's council, what is relative to that place, the projects that have been done and 
the opinion of the committee. 

Delfzyl is considered the most beautiful harbor that exists from the Scheldt to Hamburg. It is 
destined to play, in the future, a very great role. The harbor seems to leave nothing to be desired; we 
must provide for the defense of the place. 

It seems necessary first to occupy in a solid way the island of Borkum, since one passes a 
thousand fathoms of this island, and to establish an important fort at the point of Bierum, in order to 
prevent the enemy to make a simple landing and remove the batteries. This fort would defend the bay at 
1,800 toises; Holwierde's strong-battery would defend the pass at 1,500 fathoms, and finally the walls of 
Delfzyl would complete the protection of the squadron, which can retire to Termunterzy] (1), that is to 
say more than 400 fathoms from Delfzyl, at the bottom of the harbor, and about equal distance from 
Delfzyl to the first fort, at the height of Bierum. 

There is no doubt that a military establishment becomes indispensable at Delfzyl, with a pool 
sheltered from the ice. Where should this establishment be done? is it in Delfzyl itself or in 
Termunterzyl? You will consult the Minister of the Navy on this last question, for it is especially under 
the maritime point of view that it must be considered. 

What are the walls and the current establishments of Delfzyl worth? What defense could they 
do? What part is there for the future and for the current year? Even if the navy corps and the engineers 
would be of opinion to make establishments at Termunterzyl, it would be a thing to do only in a few 
years and which one could not think of for this year. It is therefore necessary to have at the point of 
Bierum a strong battery of eight pieces of 36 or 24 and four mortars, and such a battery at Howierde. It 
is also necessary to shelter Delfzyl's place with a hand, so that my fleets are protected and this place can 
defend itself. There is no doubt that, if the enemy wanted to operate on the coasts, he would seize, in 
preference to everything, 





1) Today Termunten,'” 





Page 196 


Delfzyl, which would make him a place of deposit and the most beautiful harbor of all these places. 

I also want you to give me, on Tuesday, what is relative to the Place de Groningen, the other 
forts of the Ems and the places of the Yssel. Would it be advisable to keep these places or to withdraw 
the artillery, as has been done at Breda, and to drive this artillery to Wesel? 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18464. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 29, 1812. 


Count de Cessac, I receive your letter of January 28th. Could we reduce the weight of the 
wagons being built in Antwerp, Sampigny and Italy, from the model of last July, and can withstand a 
weight reduction according to your report, that is to say that weighing 1,200 kilograms they weighed 
only 983 kilograms; what would make a reduction of 217 kilograms or 434 pounds? Order that this 
operation be done on all the cars to which it is rotted to apply it. Send instructions to the Navy, 
Sampigny, Plaisance, the Viceroy, and the artillery. Recommend that, for each service, you write on 
each wagons its weight, in order to easily distinguish between them. 

I see in your report that the wagons of the new model weigh 983 kilograms, and those of the old 
model 915; the difference is 68 kilograms: we can therefore consider these two models of caissons as the 
same weight. It would be very good if we could, from the three models of caissons, make one for the 
future. These wagons would have the benefit of having a lid, which I do. Looks like an important thing, 
to be as light as possible and to carry the same weight as the new model wagons; it would be that which 
one would build at Sampigny and at Plaisance. 

I think I have told you that it was useless to make Danzig the 160 new model wagons, and that 
the carts were to be built beforehand in the Comtoise. 

I would like you to give me a report for each of the 1,485 wagons and the 371 carriages that 
exist, and that you would tell me if the carriages in Franche-Comté can be supplied before'”° 





196 


Page 197 


May Ist. It seems to me that the 600 carriages manufactured at Lons-le-Saunier could be supplied half in 

March and half in April; there is an immense quantity in Franche-Comté. The 900 carriages built in 

Gdansk can be delivered in April, especially if you do not make the 160 new model wagons. 
NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18465. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. January 29, 1812. 


My son, direct the royal guard on Brescia, so that it arrives from the 20th to the 25th of February, 
infantry, cavalry, artillery, & c. My intention would be to start the movement on Regensburg from the 
15th to the 20th. Everything could be set in motion on the same day and by brigade. While the first 
brigade would leave Bolzano, the last would leave Bassano and Verona, and would thus be at a distance 
of seven days from the first, for I count that there are seven steps from Verona to Bolzano. The army 
would march in seven columns. It should begin by having a cavalry brigade march. 

NAPOLEON. 

P.S. Do not put anything in motion, but make me a project, and teach me if everything will be 
ready. 

According to the copy comm. by S.A.I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18466. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER. OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 29, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, you have written to General Damas, who is in the service of Westphalia, a letter 
which greatly alarmed the King of Westphalia. I have told you a hundred times that, for all that is 
beyond the Rhine, you must write to the Prince of Eckmihl. I do not know why, in war, I do not execute 
my orders. Since I believe there is no ill will, I am justified in thinking that there is a lot of anarchy. 
Today that there is a major general, I hope that all orders will pass through him. I have appointed chief 
commanders of engineers and artillery: I hope that the artillery and engineering offices will only send 
orders to commanders'®” 


197 


Page 198 


of these weapons, and that the offices of the movement, the journals and other offices will transmit 
nothing but the Major General. 
Hold your hand to the strict execution of these orders, otherwise everything will be anarchy and 
disorder, as it seems that this is in this moment. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18467. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. January 30, 1812. 


Count of Cessac, the supplies of the island of Oleron are impregnated with scab. There is a lot of 
mangrove in the three islands. There is no doctor in Oleron; 190 men died last month. Order the 
establishment of mange hospitals and clean all supplies. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original. Deposit of the war. 


18468. - NOTE FOR THE GENERAL MAJOR. 
Paris, January 30, 1812. 


The Emperor sends to the major general the states of the Grand Army handed over by the 
minister of war; His Majesty does not find them precise enough to give orders. That night he got up and 
wanted to work; which he could not do, having not found the necessary information. 

State No. 5 carries the 2nd Light Cavalry Division (7th and 8th Brigades), that is, the 11th 
chasseurs Regiment at Verdun on the 22nd, and the other regiments at Saint-Mihiel, Stenay and 
Schelestadt: what are these regiments doing in the past? of the 22nd? This assumes that I did not give 
any orders to the 2nd Light Cavalry Division, which I do not think is correct. I believe that I have 
ordered that this meet on Mainz; it is possible that, given the proximity, I did not give order; but I think I 
gave general orders to the Minister of War. 

In State No. 3, I see, at the artillery, the battalion of the train destined for the 10th division still in 
Besancon: did not I give him an order? The 10th division must however be reunited on February 15th at 
Mainz; she will not have any artillery? I may not have ordered the minister in detail, but it had to work 
together. 


The artillery park of the ocean observation corps has no'”® 


Page 199 


order? There are companies at Strasburg, at the camp at Boulogne; All this must be given orders. 

The pontooners who are in Bonn, Wesel, also seem to have no orders. 

The major-general will send to the office of the movement to take all these details, so that I shall 
have morning in the order followed for the armies of Spain. 

All that has no orders must receive it. 

It is possible that all this comes from the fact that the artillery, the engineers and the troops do 
not depend on the same office. 

I believe that the troops are badly directed: when I see that, from the Hague and Utrecht, they are 
made to pass Bois-le-Duc, there can be only one mistake; if there is time yet, change their course. It was 
more natural to take the Rhine over Wesel and Diisseldorf, which would have shortened considerably. 

Finally, I want to see, on the chart handed to me by the Major General, all the corps that make up 
the Grand Army, their march day by day, to their destination, and, in observation and also by a particular 
state, which are corps or fragments of corps, either of infantry, cavalry, artillery, crews of the train, 
crews of the military transports, which have no order to join the division to the destination of meeting 
prescribed by my orders. 

According to the unsigned original, War Depot, 


18469. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, January 31, 1812. 


Count Decrés, I see with pleasure that the two frigates have arrived in the Gironde. Order that the 
le Foudroyant, l'Océan, and the Jemmapes be put in check, for it is very precious: to have five ships 
there, which will compel the English to hold six of them to the Basques; it ruins their equipment and 
hurts them a lot. I think this squadron of five ships will need to have both frigates Ja Saale and la Circé; 
we must leave them to him. It would also be appropriate to join a corvette. 

The batteries of the Saumonards are currently in good condition. I suppose there are a number of 
gunboats and bombards organized in Rochefort Bay. Order that the gunners on Oleron Island be armed 
with are , and that they be exerted with the use of the rifle, independently of the operation of the 
cannon. 


199 


Page 200 


As soon as Captain Jacob has his five ships in the harbor, you can present me with a draft decree 


to make him rear-admiral. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by the Duchess Decres, 


18470. - DECISION. 
Paris, January 31, 1812. 








Sire, the Prince of Benevento has presented Approved. 
today the warrant of 1,280,000 francs which the 
Extraordinary Domain has issued on his current 
account to the service fund for the price of the 
palace which Your Majesty has purchased from 
the prince, I have abstained, following the 
authorization given to me by your majesty, to 
make no restraint on this warrant, the proceeds 
of which must no doubt be immediately used to 
pay the most urgent debts of the Prince of 
Benevento. 

MOLLIEN, 











From the original. Finance Archives. 
NAPOLEON, 
18471. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February Ist, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, we must reiterate the orders that, in all the regiments which make 
up the Grand Army, there should be a pot and a can in each ordinary, and that every man should have 
his little can. I refer you your memory to spend 160,000 francs for cans and bowls. I would approve this 
supply if it could be done directly in Danzig, because that is where I will need it. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18472. - TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 


MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, AT PARIS. 
Paris, February 2, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano, you will find attached a letter which I receive from Prince Eckmiihl. You 
will write by the courier to my” 


200 


Page 201 


Minister in Westphalia, and inform him that I gave orders that the person who murdered a cuirassier and 
was acquitted by the courts of the country should be tried by a military commission; that I have 
approved the measures which the marshal has lately ordered for Brunswick, and that, so promptly, the 
French blood is not avenged, I will declare this city out of my imperial protection; that I have placed 
Magdeburg in a state of siege, and that consequently the commander must take the authority which this 
measure gives him; that in linen I have issued a decree which no longer makes it possible for the courts 
of the country to judge the crimes committed by my soldiers towards the inhabitants, and by them to my 
soldiers. 

You will instruct Baron Reinhard to testify my dissatisfaction with the weakness of the 
Westphalian government, that they are surrounded by recruiters whom they do not know how to 
apprehend, that they make no example, and that finally is that in a disorganized country, such as 
Westphalia, it may be supposed that military offenses can be tried by the civil courts. You will also 
instruct Baron Reinhard to express my dissatisfaction to Mr. Simeon for the bad advice he gives to the 
King. When your mail is gone, you will have a conference on the same subject with the Minister of 
Westphalia. You will let him know how weak his government is, and how bad is the caressing spirit. 
This minister must, for his part, send a letter to his court; but it is proper that his mail should not leave 
until twenty-four hours after the departure of your letter to M. Reinhard. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18473. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS, 
Paris. February 2, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I send you a note on the hospital at Munster. Such complaints 
come to me from many quarters. Nothing advances, the men are very ill and die. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18474. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF THE WAR, IN PARIS, 
Paris February 3, 1812. 
Mr. Duke de Feltre, I answer to the report of January 31 ee 





201 


Page 202 


on the artillery train. I had found on the situation reports 17 companies of the artillery train returned 
from Spain; you find only 9; this highlights the fault committed by the office which writes the booklets 
of situation when it carries as executes movements which are only ordered. I have already noted several 
similar mistakes, and this is undermining my confidence in the work of this office. I approve and I wish 
him to put in red ink his observations and the indication of the orders given; but it must not hazard 
anything and must put in black ink only what exists. 

I have just issued a decree on the 9 companies of the train to which he remained to provide. I 
ordered that 5 companies would go to Metz and Mainz, would be supplemented in men and dear to and 
would be attached to the siege crews: it is the 4th and 6th companies of the 2nd principal, the 3rd of the 
5th principal, the 2nd of the 11th and the 3rd of the 12th. As for the four companies, namely the 1* of 
the 4th, the 1st and 2nd of the 9th bis, and the 1st of the 13th bis, I assembled them with their battalions; 
this will give more leeway to their service. But I desire a new report on what remains to be done to make 
counting in men and horses, 1“ the 13 companies mentioned in my decree of December 4th, 2™ the 4 
companies I have just added today, 3™ the 5 companies that I attach to the siege crews, in total 22 
companies, forming about three and a half battalions. I want these 22 companies to have 5,200 to 5,300 
horses. 

The 3rd company of the 3rd principal has 99 horses; it must be given to one of the depots of the 
Army of Portugal, which will meet at Rayonne and leave without delay to strengthen the teams of the 
Army of Portugal. 

The 2nd company of the 11th principal has 50 horses; give him the same order; this will provide 
an increase of horses to the teams of the Army of Portugal. 

Auch has eight train depots and four at Toulouse; these twelve deputies have 130 non- 
commissioned officers and 160 soldiers: my intention is that the deposits of the 5th and 10th principal, 
2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 10th and 12th bis be left in their entirety, but that we all take the men available and 
that the depots of the 18 other battalions which would be at Toulouse and at Auch should be returned to 
Metz; so that, of the 26 battalions of the train, I intend 8 for Spain, whose deposits remain at Auch and 
Toulouse, and 18 for the Grande Armée and the interior. 

Give the 9th bis company, which is in Catalonia, the order of? 


202 


Page 203 


return to Mainz; she will leave her horses available to the companies of the 4th and 13th bis. We can not 
bring back the company of the 13th bis, since it would remain in Catalonia only one company. 

Nor can we bring back any company from the army of Aragon. This army having found many 
horses in Valencia, I suppose that the companies of the train will be supplemented there. 

The Army of the South must be ordered to dismiss the companies of the 12th principal, those of 
the 2nd bis, a company of the 5th bis and one of the 10th bis. That army, which has 2-1 companies, 
would send back 6; there would remain some 18. The Duke of Dalmatia would have to send all the men 
away and keep the horses and harnesses. These 6 companies, arrived in France, would go to the depots 
of Auch and Toulouse. 

The army of Portugal has 23 companies, plus the companies which were attached to the Souham 
division, which is part of that army, in all 26 companies: also send him to send six companies; she could 
keep a portion of the men, if that were necessary. By this means, the army of Catalog would return 1 
company; that of Midi 6, and that of Portugal 6, total 13. Of these 13 companies, those which belong to 
the 8 battalions which are to remain in Spain would go to Auch and Toulouse to complete themselves in 
men and horses, and would be intended to return then to Spain. The companies belonging to the 18 other 
battalions would join them in Metz and Mainz. In any case, we would have in France 13 new companies 
available according to the circumstances. Of the 75 companies there are in Spain, there would still be 61 
or more than 10 battalions; so there are still other companies to bring in later. 

Thus, I will have at the Grande Armée 82 companies of the train or 11 battalions minus 2 
companies; which, with the train of the Guard and the Italian train, will make the value of 20 battalions 
on 30,000 horses. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18475. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBA IN HAMBURG. 
Paris, February 3, 1812. 


Cousin, I read in the English gazelles a letter from Helgoland, where the English say that all the 
batteries of the coast have been disarmed. I think that is not true. They boast that there is””’ 





203 


Page 204. 


few French people on the coast and smuggling. I still suppose that this is not true. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl, 


18476. - TOM. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, February 4th, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano, send by the courier of today the order to Baron Alquier to demand that 
Denmark let out 6,000 horses of Holstein, exempting them from all kinds of rights; Unless the King 
wishes to supply them at the same price as the Prince of Eckmiihl was to pay them in Hamburg. I will be 
glad to see that Denmark favors my return in every way. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18477. - TOM. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, February 4th, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano, I asked you to bring me a report Thursday on the situation of the army of 
the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, to give you instructions on the representations to be made to the court of 
Dresden on this object important. I asked you what it would cost to put the entire cavalry at a cost of 100 
men and 1,000 horses per regiment, by first requiring the Grand Duchy to complete its present suit. It is 
a question of knowing what is the difference of the complete of the cavalry and the infantry with the 
strength at the time of January. I will take a 4th battalion per regiment of infantry; it would be necessary 
to know what it would cost me; but, first, the current suit must be completed. I will take over a battalion 
of military crews, but the current suit would have to be filled. I send you statements, which I want you to 
bring back to me on Thursday, which can be used to make your report. 

Present me on Thursday a draft letter to my minister in Dresden, in the following sense: 

1 The regiments of infantry, cavalry regiments, artillery, regimental artillery, crews of the 
artillery train, the crews of the regiments, the battalion of the Grand Duchy train, must be" 





204 


Page 205 


completed to the current strength. (You will find attached status reports to January 15th, which will help 
you to know what is missing in men, horses, harnesses, cars, and that it is necessary to obtain without 
delay.) 

2™ The eleven infantry regiments which are part of the Army of the Grand Duchy will be 
composed of four battalions, forming twenty-four companies, and a depot company; which will make 
twenty-five companies. These eleven 4th battalions will be at my expense. 

3" Three 25th companies will be created for the 5th, 10th and 11th Regiments which are at my 
expense at Danzig. 

4"" | will take at my expense the increase of the current total of the cavalry regiments, brought to 
anew complete of 1,050 men, officers not included, and to 1,000 horses, officers not included; which 
will make an increase of about 200 horses per regiment. 

5"" After the current battalion of the train has been completed, I will consent to a new battalion 
being raised at my expense. 

It would be necessary for you to crack me a report on the Saxon army, by letting me know what 
it has to supply, what it has under arms and what will remain in Saxony, and by presenting me a project 
so that every The regiment has a packed ambulance box and a paper box, each battalion a cartridge box 
and a box for the bread, and independently there is a battalion of military crews in a row. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18478. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 4, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I send you a letter from the Prince d'Eckmuhl, January 30, 1812. 
You will see that he can not procure horses. He proposes the measure of raising it by requisition in the 
32nd Military Division. I agree, in order to be able to fulfill all the service that Germany has to fulfill. 
Write to him in this way during the day. 

I think we should take such a step for France. It seems that suppliers, since measures have been 
taken seriously to prevent them from corrupting, can no longer provide. Let me know what we bought in 
January 





205 


Page 206 


and what we can have in February, and present me the distribution of requisitioning horses between 
prefectures and districts of sub - prefecture. 
Be sure to make available to General Bourcier the necessary funds to pay for the horses that will 
be required in Germany. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the original letter, the deposit of the war. 


18419. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 4, 1812. 


Count Decres, the reports of the port of Toulon, like the relations which come to us from 
England, make known that the vessels of my squadron have mishandled; that they had to take two 
English frigates, and that they let them escape by their fault. Testify my displeasure to Rear Admiral 
Baudin, and ask the names of the captains who were the most advanced in this affair. Tell Vice-Admiral 
Emeriau that the Government must know everything, and that we must tell him everything with the 
greatest frankness; that the manner of disguising the facts is very reprehensible. You may order this 
officer to return on board. Make him understand that I hope he will redouble his zeal; that I will be in 
Toulon at the moment when I shall be least expecting it; that I will find that the squadron maneuvers 
well, if in line of battle the vessels are bowsprit on stern. Ask to be told how close the ships have been to 
the different exits. Report to me on the different requests made by Vice-Admiral Emeriau for his 
officers; I also want to do something for him. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18480. - TO THE COUNT DEFERMON, 
GENERAL INTENDANT OF THE EXTRAORDINARY DOMAIN, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 6, 1812. 


Count Defermon, the society of maternal charity having been created by decree of May 5, 1810, 
it returns to him 333,333 francs for 1810, at the rate of 500,000 francs per year. On this sum, I think I 
have disposed of 291,666 francs, which, on the occasion of my marriage, I distributed to the poor. I do 
not know on what funds this sum7”° 





206 


Page 207 


was imputed. It would thus remain due 41,667 francs on 1810 to the society of maternal Charity. My 
intention is that you order this amount, and that it be paid in the week. You will assign it to Chapter VII, 
entitled Unforeseen Expenses of the Budget of 1810, on which there is still 140,145 francs, 88 centimes. 
It is due, for 1811, 500,000 francs; you will make them pay on chapter IV, Compensation and gratuities. 
Finally, for 1812, I made a chapter of the budget. It will be a good idea that at the end of each month 
you have your dues paid into the fund of the Society of Charity Kindergarten; the 500,000 francs due for 
1811 must be paid in the week. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Count Defermon, 


18481. - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DE LA RIBOISIERE, 
COMMANDING THE ARTILLERY OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 6, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de la Riboisiere, I send you a letter from the Prince d'Eckmihl; I am 
attaching a report made to it by the Major General. It is necessary that you become aware of all this, so 
that you now order it as commander-in-chief of the artillery of the army. 

I notice first that, if the cars of the 6th Division arrive at Miinster hitched, that is good; but, if 
they can not reach it, this movement is impracticable; for before the 20th of February, the 6th, 8th, and 
9th Divisions will make a movement. It is therefore necessary that their artillery be hitched up. 

It is necessary that on the Ist of March the headquarters crew of Magdeburg, which might be 
destined against Spandau or Kolberg, be in good condition; that at the same time the siege crew of 
Danzig, which might be destined against Graudenz, be in good condition; that in the supposition that I 
am dealing with Prussia. I do not need to inform you that the War Ministry must ignore these 
provisions; the major-general is not instructed; you alone are in secret. Thinking it useless to say 
anything of that to the engineers or the artillery, you must get the state of the Magdeburg and Danzig 
siege parks to see if they can fulfill my purpose. You will report this to me confidentially. I recommend 
that this letter be read by no one, and that the names Spandau, Kolberg and Graudenz do not come out of 
your hands, because in this” 





207 


Page 208 


I am very well with Prussia. It would be necessary that, in the first days of March, carts of artillery 
should leave Mainz; they would bring to Magdeburg what would be necessary for the crew for artillery 
and engineering. So, if in the first days of March I wanted to walk on Spandau or Kolberg, everything 
would be in state. 

There is at Magdeburg a deck crew of which I have not spoken; it would be necessary to put it in 
condition, in order to be able to use it on the Oder and on the small rivers of Prussia, if the case 
happened. Make me a report on that. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Count de la Riboisiére. 


18482. - TO THE COUNT OF MONTESQUIOU, 
GRANDE CHAMBELLAN, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 6, 1812. 


Count Montesquiou, I refer you the list of young men and ladies who are invited to the balls, 
without approving it. All the ladies whose mothers or aunts are invited can come. It would be 
inappropriate to invite damsels whose mothers would not be asked. As for young people, all listeners or 
aides-de-camp, and sons, nephews or brothers of persons presented, may also come. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by General Count de Montesquiou - Fezensac. 


18483. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. February 7, 1812. 


My Son, I receive your letter of January 29th. I see you have a good company of sailors who will 
follow the guard. It is necessary to have you followed also by 200 workers of the arsenal, carpenters, 
caulkers and wheelwrights. They will have a caisson filled with the necessary tools for their service. 
These two corps will march together and reunited with the deck-crew, the sappers, and the company of 
the Italian genius, whose formation I have ordered; the rivers will be only a weak obstacle: we will be 
able to pass them in a few moments. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S.A.I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg.””® 





Page 209 


18484. - TO THE PRINCE CAMILLE BORGHESE, 
GOVERNOR GENERAL OF DEPARTMENTS IN THE ALPS, IN TURIN. 
Paris, February 7, 1812. 


My cousin, chair the college. I am satisfied with your services, You can not come to the army; 
you must stay in Piedmont, where your presence is necessary. 
NAPOLEON 
From the original comm. by the Marquis Gozani di San-Giorgio. 


18485. -NOTE 
FOR MINISTERS OF INTERIOR AND TRADE 
Paris February 8, 1812, 


We are in a vicious circle, we must leave. I have prescribed that it should be distributed by the 
Paris charity committees 30,000 pounds of bread and 30,000 economic soups, which will disinterested 
the poor; if this help is not enough, I will increase it. I ordered distributions to Versailles, Saint-Cloud, 
Saint-Germain, Compiegne, Rambouillet, and Fontainebleau, to the title of principal owner of these 
cantons. Having thus disinterested the most needy mass, my intention would be to bring Tuesday the 
bread to 18 cents and the flour of the reserve to 85 francs, to prohibit any purchase of flour above 85 
francs, so that the reserve would offer flour only 85 francs to the flourers. The flourers need to sell; we 
are not in a hurry, since a large quantity of wheat is coming. I am waiting for the minutes of the last 
meeting of the council of the living to know where our purchases are. These three steps in front of one 
another seem useful, always maintaining that the reserve does not make any credit. 

NAPOLEON. 
According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18186. - AT THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNTY DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 8, 1812. 


Count Decres, I have read with attention your report of January 29th on the Boulogne and 
Schelde fleets. My intention is to raise in the course of March the 9,000 men of the conscription of 
1813. [have granted you the 1,400 sailors of 1810 of Holland; I suppose you made me raise the 1,500 

209 
men 


Page 210 


registration; so there will be nothing disturbed by my decree of November 14, and everything will be 
organized according to its form and content. 

Let me know if you have made me sign the appointments of staffs and crews. 

We must not have regard to the claim of Vice Admiral Emeriau, but always increase the number 
of crews. 

I really want the 69 gunboats to exist in the Scheldt. I wish that there should also be forty-six 
barges, so that each vessel had, to fight against the English, three gunboats, two barges, which would be 
supported by four good frigates, four corvettes and two brigs. If the two frigates of Saint-Malo could go 
there, we would have six frigates, which I would consider very advantageous. 

You must put before me the precautions taken last year for the defense of the islands of 
Walcheren, Goeree, and Schouwen. The same measures must be taken for this year. It is my intention 
that twenty-three gunboats, commanded by a captain and placed under the command of the commander 
of the island of Walcheren, be intended for the defense of Vlissingen and to hold a line of embossing in 
front of this port. I also attach importance to having the Texel, if not the hundred twenty gunboats, at 
least eighty gunboats and forty cannoneers or big barges, in order to be able to fight with advantage 
against the fleets that the enemy could send to attack the various passes of the Zuiderzee. Even if the 
crews of the fleet could not serve all these gunboats, if they were in good condition at Nieuwe-Diep, the 
admiral, according to the circumstances, would decide to disarm some frigates and reinforce the fleets. 
You know how useful it will be in the Zuiderzee this flotilla always maneuvering, exercising the crews 
and defending passes. 

As for Boulogne, it is my intention that the 17th Battalion continue to remain there; but that the 
12th and 14th leave it without delay under Rear Admiral Baste. They will mount forty gunboats, twenty- 
three barges of new model, nine prames and four bombards. You will organize the divisions as you will 
hear, to facilitate the passage. They will go to Cherbourg. In Cherbourg I shall have twelve prames, sixty 
gunboats, and fifty barges. I see in this movement several advantages. In the port of Cherbourg, these 
buildings will be able to exercise better; they can go out every day; I will have 480 sailors”’° 


210 


Page 211 


must go there from Le Havre on the five ships leaving for this port, 2,000 seamen who are now 
embarked in the port of Cherbourg, and finally those of the 12th and 14th crew: I will thus have nearly 
5,000 sailors in Cherbourg. Rear Admiral Troude would command all the harbor. Rear-Admiral Baste, 
under his command, would command the flotilla. It would remain in Boulogne the 17th crew, which 
would have five prames, twenty-seven gunboats and one hundred and thirty-two boats gunners, 
including the gunners of Dunkirk. 

In this way I will have assembled defense fleets in the three most vulnerable points, Holland, 
Scheldt and Cherbourg, and, in case of events, this large quantity of small boats will be able to offer for 
the defense, especially for that of Cherbourg, either a flotilla or soldiers. 

It will be convenient, on this occasion, to diminish the administration of Boulogne as you 
propose, to order, however, that the embossing line often goes out to remove the bombardment, and 
finally to remove from this city, by directing it on Calais and Saint-Omer, all that is useless in its 
defense, so that, Boulogne falling into the power of the enemy, I experience the least possible loss. 

You can use transport or service vessels for the service of the Scheldt or the transport of timber, 
according to the needs of your department. It will be enough for me to have at Boulogne thirty 
buildings, prames or gunboats, one hundred and fifty gunboats and a hundred barges. By bringing 
together two or three hundred fishing boats, when we want to make this flotilla play the game it must 
play in a general operation, we will always have the means to land 30 to 40,000 men and a few horses 
on a single point. Besides, the flotilla of Cherbourg can easily refer to Boulogne, or from Cherbourg, if 
there were a camp there, to operate under the protection of the squadron which would dominate the 
Channel. I therefore consider it advantageous from every point of view to have a hundred flotilla ships 
in Cherbourg. 

Present me a draft letter to write to Rear-Admiral Basie for these arrangements, a draft letter to 
the Vice-admirals, Missiessy and Dewinler for organizing the Scheldt and Zuiderzee defense, and finally 
a read to Vice Admiral Ver Huell to provide for all the cases of the North defense. 

In case of war, my intention is that my gunboats and my fleets find refuge in the Elbe under the 
batteries of Cuxhaven, and in the Ems under the place of Delfzyl; which would lead me to think that it 
would be necessary to have in Delfzyl a marine commissioner”! 


211 


Page 212 


and a small maritime establishment; I suppose there is one in Cuxhaven. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18487. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTIG, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 8, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I signed the decree which forms the new Spanish regiment. Instead of five 
battalions, I reduced it to three. It is necessary that this regiment be composed only of Catalans and 
Spaniards of the left bank of the Ebro and not be formed on the principle which directed the formation 
of the Napoleonic regiment, since this new regiment is created for the meeting. He must be given French 
uniforms, French cockades, a French administration, and choose an honorary colonel attached to the 
system of the meeting. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18488.- TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 8, 1812, 


My cousin, order the viceroy to send the Italian guard from Milan to Brescia, where it is 
necessary that it be returned to you as soon as possible. Order the Viceroy to send all his army corps to 
Ralisbonne from the 16th to the 20th. For this purpose, the 1st Division, with its artillery and a cavalry 
brigade to which it will keep the head, will leave from the 16th to the 20th, in two columns, the artillery 
divided between the two columns and with provisions for four days; the 2nd division, with its artillery 
and cavalry, will leave Trent on two columns. At the same time the Italian division will leave in two 
columns and the royal guard in one column. The rest of the cavalry will leave in two columns. The park 
will be well escorted. The movement must be as fast as possible; it is therefore necessary that what is at 
Bassano, Castelfranco, & c. concentrates. The observation corps of Italy will start with four days of 
food. 

You will inform the King of Bavaria, when addressing your letter to my minister at Munich, that 
the army of Italy, 80,000 strong,” 


212 


Page 213 


will cross the Tyrol in nine columns; that it starts from the 16th to the 20th of February; that it is 
necessary that he give his orders to have Mount Brenner clean up the snow and to supply the troops with 
what is necessary; that it is important to keep the secret as long as possible, so that the troops have time 
to reach the Vistula before the Russians know anything about it, and can come and ravage the Grand 
Duchy of Warsaw, as the Austrians have done made in Bavaria in the previous war. 

You will write to the Viceroy that you have warned the King of Bavaria; that the snows of the 
Brenner do not mean anything; that he must send many sappers, and, with money, reunite the 
mountaineers to clean this pass, and that we must collect as much snow as we can to relieve the horses 
on the way. 

The viceroy will send his horses and his crew, but he will not move from Milan. He can send 
General d'Anthouard as the most interested, and make him understand that I do not hear that the snows 
of the Brenner are twelve hours late. Reiterate that his movement must be as fast as possible; that it is 
better for him to delay it by one day, but that, once unmasked, he must descend like a torrent towards the 
Danube. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18489. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 8, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke d'Abrantes to be returned from his person to Verona on the 15th of 
February. He will have the command of the observation corps of Italy under the orders of the Viceroy. 
He will manage his horses and his luggage on Strasbourg and thence on Regensburg. He will be able to 
find in Verona the horses and what will be necessary for the road. He will be in charge of driving the 
troops. 

Recommend that he keep the deepest mystery about his departure and his destination, so that his 
aides-de-camp and his servants do not know where he is going. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war.?'° 





213 


Page 214 


18190. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 8, 1812. 


My cousin, order that on the 10th of February, the 4th company of gunners of the Guard leave 
for Brussels with eight pieces of 4 and the number of infantry boxes necessary for the service of a 
division of the Guard composed of four regiments , or eight battalions and sixteen caissons of infantry. 
1* Order also the administration to send out two commissioners of the wars and the two caissons per 
regiment necessary for the baggage of the 5th, regiments of skirmishers and voltigeurs, me eight 
caissons of ambulance, with the number of surgeons suitable. On the 10th of February, the two 
regiments of skirmishers and voltigeurs, who will go to Brussels with the caissons (as Brussels would be 
congested, they will go as far as Louvain), will be sent to Brigade General Lanusse, Adjutant. General 
de la Garde, will leave with this brigade, of which he will have the command, and, like the most senior 
general, he will command all the division. 

The battalions of the 6th regiment of skirmishers are still each with the force of 500 men, they 
will leave by battalion the frame of a company to receive 300 conscripts, and these four companies, 
which will make 1,200 men, will join them as soon as the conscripts will be dressed and a little trained. 
You will also order that the two elite gendarmerie detachments in Antwerp be ready to leave to 
campaign and join this division of the Guard as soon as it receives the order to march. Colonel Durosnel 
will send for this purpose, in all haste, to these detachments all that they would need. Finally you will 
order the 2nd regiment of Dutch light-horse to leave on the 10th; it will not pass through Paris, and you 
will trace a road for it to disguise as much as possible; he will go to Brussels. By this means there will 
be in Brussels, on the 20th of February, a division of the Guard, which shall be called the Ist Guard 
Division, composed of four regiments, having eight battalions and forming a corps of 6,000 men, with 
eight pieces cannon, cartridges, ambulances and all that is needed. There will also be my 2nd light horse 
regiment. You will join a company of 150 men of my hunters, which, with 150 gendarmes that you will 
send, will make 300 men and will bring the number of horses to 1,200. It is necessary that this 
movement takes place*"* 


214 


Page 215 


with as much secrecy as possible. It will not escape you that, although I need to have Poles in this 
vanguard, I did not put them in the least to arouse the attention. Recommend to General Colbert to 
disappear and to bid farewell to no one. All the movements that will take place in Vincennes and Paris 
must be done at night and so as not to be noticed. As it is possible for this vanguard to have an advance 
over my other divisions, it would be proper if, in the detachment of my 150 chasseurs, there were some 
officers who were accustomed to my service, and that General Guyot and a major hunters were sending 
a horse for them. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria, 


18491. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Paris. February 8, 1812. 


Cousin, I receive your letter of February 2, with the statement of the general ..... Insinuate that it is 
unworthy of a governor and an aide-de-camp of the Emperor to have interests in the armaments of 
privateers; that it is doubtful if this is not defended by the laws of war, since a governor, being a judge of 
corsairs, can not be a party; but that certainly this is repulsed by the laws of delicacy and honor. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. pal 'Mm, the Marechal Princess of Eckmuhl. 


18192. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris, February 8, 1812, 


My Son, the Major General is sending you orders to begin your movement from the 15th to the 
20th. You will send the commander of your artillery with sappers and money to clear Mount Brenner. 
The passage of this pass must not delay you by twenty-four hours. Reinforce the Italian corps so that 
they arrive completely. Send your crews, but stay with you in Milan. I send General Charpentier to be 
your chief of staff. General Vignolle will remain in Italy until further notice. I send the Duke d'Abrantes 
to serve under you. I send General Gouviou Saint-Cyr to command the Bavarians. My intention is that 
the 13th, 14th, and 15th Divisions, and the Bavarians, be under your command; which will make you an 
army of 80,000 men.”!> 





215 


Page 216 


as you are the pivot of the movement, it is necessary that, if it were useful, you delay your movement 
for a day, so that when it is unmasked, you descend like a torrent from the top of the Brenner on the 
Danube. You will go to Glogau, and, if circumstances do not prevent it, you will have the beautiful 
Upper Silesia to repair and rebuild. Speaking on February 20th, you will arrive on April Ist. It is 
probable that the season will not be advanced enough to begin operations, and that you will have some 
eight days to rest. I told you that the Italian artillery was to send 200 carters to Regensburg to buy 
horses and make harnesses to repair your losses. As soon as the movement is unmasked and the head of 
your troops arrives near Augsburg, you will be able to charge the Colonels of the Italian Light Cavalry 
Regiment and the French Dragon Regiments and the Battalion Commanders of the Train to Send Buy 
Horses in Dresden to repair the losses of the road; but this must be done only when your movement is 
unmasked and your first column arrives in Augsburg. 

I had the King of Bavaria write that your army corps was 80,000 men; when you write, support 
this saying. 

It is necessary that the Italian payers carry with them the pay for all February, March and April. 

Let me know what will be the state of affairs in Italy after the departure of the army, and what 
will be the officers who will command on the frontier and in the various places. 

NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18493. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 9, 1812. 


My Cousin, the two battalions of Prince Primate, the battalion of the Grand Duke of Wurzburg, 
his squadron of cavalry, six pieces of cannon, and the 5th regiment of the Princely division, as 
organized in the last campaign, in all five battalions, one squadron and six pieces of cannon, will form 
the 1st brigade of the princely division. Send orders to these corps to start and march on Hamburg. They 
will start on the 15th of February, in order to arrive in Hamburg as soon as possible. Warn the prince of 
Eckmiihl of this movement. These troops will be used in defense”'® 





216 


Page 217 


from the coast and to contain the country. Propose me a French Brigade General, speaking German, to 
command this brigade. 

Order General Damas to leave Dusseldorf on the 12th, with three battalions of the Grand Duchy 
of Berg and fourteen pieces of artillery on foot and on horseback, and to march on Paderborn; he will 
receive at Paderborn the orders of Prince Eckmiihl to continue his journey on Stralsund. He will have 
the command of the Ist brigade of the Berg-Donorder troops, that the cadre of the lancers of Berg who 
is in Paris will leave tomorrow to go to Diisseldorf, and that the regiment of lancers who is in Hamm, on 
the side of Diisseldorf, speaks no later than March 10 to join the brigade of General Damascus. Order 
that the Hessian-Darmstadt Brigade, with five battalions, a cavalry regiment and eight pieces of cannon, 
under the command of a Hessian brigadier general, leave on the 17th of February and proceed to 
Magdeburg. Baden's brigade, composed of five or six battalions, a cavalry regiment and eight or ten 
pieces of cannon, departs on the 16th and also goes to Magdeburg. Order General Daendels to be sent 
on the 14th to Baden. In Baden to see and review the troops, to be on the 16th at Darmstadt to review 
the troops and to put them in motion, and then to proceed to Magdeburg, where he will take command 
of this division. With these provisions, the Daendels division will consist of the Berg, Bade and Hesse- 
Darmstadt brigades. It will have more than 12,000 infantry, nearly 2,000 cavalry and thirty pieces of 
cannon. You will make these movements known to Prince Eckmithl; you will also inform him that I 
intend this division to occupy Swedish Pomerania, Stettin and Kiistrin. Glogau will be occupied by the 
Saxons. 

Order the 4th and 6th Prince Regiments, composed as they were in the last campaign, to march 
on the 29th, in order to meet on the 1st of March in the place to be designated by the Prince of Eckmiihl, 
around Hamburg. These two regiments will form the 2nd brigade of the princely division. Present me a 
brigadier general, speaking German, to order it. The arsenals of Hamburg and Magdeburg will be 
provided with the want of guns which this brigade would experience, without, however, giving guns of 
a model which would be proper to my troops. By this means, the princely division will be composed of 
two brigades, ten strong battalions of 8,000 men, 200 horses and six pieces or” 





217 


Page 218 


canon; it is destined for the guard of Hamburg and the whole coast. General Saint-Cyr could be charged 
with the command of this division. The letters you write for this movement to the various princes will be 
addressed to their minister of war, but you will be careful to send them only by my ministers or charge 
d'affaires. For the 4th and 6th regiments, which will not start until the 20th, my ministers will not deliver 
your letter until the 20th; but, meanwhile, they will press the formation of the regiments. 

Finally, send the Prince of Eckmiihl to make sure that the Mecklenburg Brigade is in good 
condition, and warn him that this brigade is part of his army corps and that he will have to take it with 
him. I find myself disposing of all the troops of the little princes. I will let you know my intentions on 
the troops of Bavaria, Wurtemberg, Westphalia, and Saxony. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18494. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF OBSERVATION OF THE ELBE, HAMBURG. 
Paris, February 9, 1812. 


My Cousin, from now on you will receive my orders from the Major General. However, I myself 
want to write to you to warn you that, from the 20th to the 30th of February, your corps must make a 
great movement; that it is necessary that the four regiments of Bruyere's division with their battery of 
light artillery be on the frontier of Pomerania, ready to take the head of the column. You must give the 
same order for your two brigades of light cavalry, so that General Friant may, twenty-four hours after 
you have received the order, leave with his division, that of Dessaix, the eight cavalry regiments , and go 
on the Vistula. The other divisions and the three divisions of cuirassiers will follow at five or six days 
back. All this must be very secretive. Your movement depends on the day when the body of observation 
of Italy will be unmasked. It is necessary that you be aware of the Vistula before the thaw and before the 
couriers who announce that the corps of Italy has unmasked its movement have arrived in St. 
Petersburg. The Major General will write to you later in a few days, but there is not a moment to lose to 
let you know that the artillery horses and military crews must be in their place. 

Give all the orders that do not require any confidence, but”!® 


218 


Page 219 


do not tell anyone you have to walk; on the contrary, make the rumor that everything is getting better. 
General Damascus, with three battalions and fourteen guns of the Grand Duchy of Berg, has 
orders to proceed to Paderborn; direct it on Stralsund; he will occupy Swedish Pomerania. 
Take nothing that belongs to the 2nd corps of the Elbe, either artillery, cavalry or sappers; but the 
whole 12th battalion of military crews belongs to you. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18495. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. February 10, 1812, 


My Son, I receive your letter of the 4th. If you can begin your movement from the 16th to the 
18th, as the Major General has summoned you, begin it; so that the head, instead of arriving on the 13th 
at Regensburg, would arrive on the Sth. I will attach importance to what you can gain during these eight 
days. 
I suppose the 14th battalion of military crews will be part of your army corps, and you will 
divide it between the divisions. Take steps to ensure that the Italian battalion, which can not leave until 
the first days of March, is loaded with shoes. If the shoes are cheaper in Dresden and Bavaria than in 
Italy, as soon as you have passed Innsbruck, that is to say, when your movement is unmasked, that the 
colonels of regiments send people to order from those countries. 

The Duke d'Abrantes leaves tomorrow to go and command this corps under your command. 

I warn you that the Bavarians will be part of your army corps; General Saint-Cyr will command 
them. You see that your corp will be about 80,000 men. It is useless for you to write anything of this in 
Bavaria. 

You must remain of your person in Milan. Besides, I want you to go through Paris. Your aides- 
de-camp and your officers will send their horses and their baggage to the army. I think the Vice-Queen 
must stay in Milan. You can spend the whole month of February in Italy. The Duke d'Abrantes, who will 
lead the army corps, will correspond with you. It will be enough if you join the corps as it passes 
through Dresden, that is, at the end of March. 


The army corps should not stop at Regensburg, but continue””” 


219 


Page 220 


to Glogau, and there is still a long way from Regensburg to Glogau. 
NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchteuberg. 


18496. - TO MARSHAL MARCONT, DUKE OF RAGUSA, 
COMMANDING THE ARMY OF PORTUGAL (1). 
Paris. February 11, 1812. 


The Emperor regrets, Monsieur le Duke, that with the Souham division and the three other 
divisions you had assembled you did not return to Salamanca to see what was happening. This would 
have given a lot to think of the English and could have been useful in Ciudad-Rodrigo. 

The way to rescue the army of the South in the position you are in, is to place your headquarters 
in Salamanca, to concentrate your army by detaching only a division on the Tagus, to reoccupy Asturias 
and to compel the enemy to remain at Almeida and in the north, by the fear of an invasion. You can 
even push posts, march on Ciudad Rodrigo, if you have the necessary artillery of siege, and, your honor 
is attached to it, to take this place, or, if the want of food or artillery forces you to postpone this 
operation until the harvest, you could at least make an incursion into Portugal and bring you to the 
Douro and Almeida. That threat would contain the enemy. 

The army of the South is very strong. The Valencia army, which today has its outposts on 
Alicante, clears its right. 

The position you must take must therefore be offensive, from Salamanca to Almeida. As long as 
the English will gather you in force in Salamanca, they will make no movement. But if you go from 
your person to Valladolid, if your troops are sent to get lost on the rear, if especially your cavalry is not 
able after the rainy season, you will expose all the north of Spain to disasters. 

It is essential to reoccupy Asturias, because it takes more people to keep the edge of the plain to 
Biscay than to keep Asturias. 

Since the English divided into two corps, one on the south 





1) This letter, sent in figures and signed by the Major General, was dictated by the Emperor; the minute is, in several places, 
corrected by the hand of Napoleon.”” 





220 


Page: 121 


and the other on you, they are not strong, and you must be much stronger than them. The letter I wrote 
you, and which you received on the 13th of December, made you know what you should do: threaten the 
English, and if you think that for the moment you can not take back Ciudad-Rodrigo, have them 
repaired. paths leading to Almeida, have Salamanca strengthened, gather your siege crews, send large 
detachments to Ciudad - Rodrigo; that will contain the English, will not tire your troops, and will have 
much less inconvenience than to disseminate you as you propose. 

I suppose Montbrun has arrived and you have finally assembled your army. 

The capture of Valencia has greatly strengthened the army of the South, and you must assume 
the English crazy to believe they can walk on Badajoz leaving you in Salamanca, that is to say by letting 
you arrive in Lisbon before them. They will go to the south if, by badly calculated measures, you detach 
two or three divisions on the Tagus, because, by this, you reassure them and tell them that you do not 
want to do anything against them. 

I repeat it to you, the intention of the Emperor is that you do not leave Salamanca, that you make 
reoccupy Asturias, that even army relies on the position of Salamanca and that you threaten the English 
there. 

By order of the Emperor, 

Major General ALEXANDRE, Prince of Neuchatel and Wagram, 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18497, - IN PRINCE CAMBACERES, 
ARCHICHANCELIER OF THE EMPIRE, PARIS. 
Paris, February 12, 1812. 


Cousin, I have read the report which you have presented to me, putting before me the 
requisitions addressed to you by my attorney general at the Imperial High Court, for the purpose of 
informing you that he It was necessary to unite the said court for the judgment of those who took part in 
the surrender of Bailen. The considerations you have on the lack of organization of the high court, and 
on the inconvenience of having to put this matter to the test of judicial proceedings, have determined me 
to dismiss it, as you have proposed to me. , to an inquiry council which will meet on the 17th of this 
month of February, as I have ordered it by my decree*”’ 


221 


Page 222 


of this day, of which you will be addressed expedition. You will take care to hold the execution of the 
various provisions which this decree contains, and I authorize you to indicate the place of the sessions in 
the ordinary room of my Council of State. 
NAPOLEON 
According to the copy. Archives of Justice, 


18408. - NOTE DICTED IN THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS. 
Palace of Tuileries, February 12, 1812. 


It is necessary that the great judge send letters patent to allow these six people to remain in the 
service of the king of Westphalia, but not to allow them to be naturalized Westphalians. He will write to 
the Minister of Justice of the Kingdom of Westphalia a letter by which, by sending him these six letters 
patent, he will inform him that the Emperor refuses to grant any letters of naturalization in Westphalia, 
as in Spain, at Naples, and in Italy, since the sovereigns of these countries themselves have not ceased to 
be French, which results from the right they have retained in the throne, from the dignity with which 
they are clothed in the Empire, and from the regulations which that they are treated in this quality as 
French; that being so, these sovereigns do not need the French they employ to cease to be French, since 
on the contrary they find in this very quality a guarantee of their fidelity; it is sufficient that they have 
the authorization to pass to their service, that consequently His Majesty has sent the six letters patent in 
the form prescribed by the decree of August 26, 1811. 

The great judge will also submit to the Emperor letters patent for some of the French employed 
in Madrid and Naples, in order to fix the principles. 

He will write to the Minister of Foreign Relations to inform him of these principles, so that he 
may write to the Emperor's ministers at the different powers. 

As to the princes of the Rhine Confederation, Russia, Prussia, and Denmark, questions of this 
nature can be answered only individually. 

In general, His Majesty will grant letters of naturalization only in cases where there is no interest 
for France to do otherwise. For example, a Frenchman is established as a merchant in Odessa; he finds 
great advantages therein, and these advantages can be preserved only by naturalization: there is no 
inconvenience” 





222 


Page 223 


to allow it to be naturalized. An individual, driven by events in a court, has obtained a great charge, 
which he would lose if he were not naturalized: he may, by exception, be allowed to do so, because 
France has no interest in what we defend him. 

But all the Frenchmen who, by the services which they render to a foreign prince, can make the 
law to these princes, like myself, for example, a minister, a general difficult to replace, do not need that 
His Majesty allow the naturalization, since the prince needs them: it is enough to allow them to remain 
in his service. 

The foreign princes who are French have more need of their French servants than these 
Frenchmen need to remain in their service. Moreover, if the sovereign demanded that they make 
themselves natural foreigners, this requirement would be ridiculous, since it is precisely by their quality 
of French that they have one more title to his confidence; so that, if they took away the heart of the 
French, by depriving them of their quality, they would diminish the advantage the prince can derive 
from it. 

It is not the same with a Frenchman brought by circumstances to the court of a non-French 
foreign prince, who is clad in court. 

It will be necessary for the Minister of Foreign Affairs to develop all these considerations, by 
writing to the Ministers in the Courts of Naples, Madrid, and Westphalia, in order to make the question 
clear, because the difficulties in this respect arise only from the fact that the question is not clear; which 
is the result of the lack of analysis. 

According to the copy. Archives of Justice, 


18499. -: TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 13, 1812. 


My Cousin, the Ist and 2nd Company of the 2nd Battalion of the Military Crews, who arrive on 
the 15th at Mayence, will be attached to the Observation Corps of the Ocean; the 3rd and 4th companies 
of the same battalion, which leave on February 20th from Antwerp for Mainz, the 5th and 6th companies 
of the same battalion, which leave Commercy on February 15th, the six companies of the 10th battalion 
and three of the 6th battalion, will be attached to the service of the general headquarters, the three other 
companies of the 6th battalion, which the prince of Eckmiihl is in charge of organizing in Germany, will 
be attached to the 2nd corps of the Elbe, and you will accordingly instruct the Duke of Reggio urge their 
formation; 





223 


Page 224 


you will make sure that the executives have left Paris. The 9th Military Crew Battalion will be fully 
attached until further notice to the Italian Observation Corps. Thus, the 12th battalion of military crews 
will have its six companies attached to the Ist observation corps of the Elbe; the 2nd corps will have the 
three companies of the 6th battalion which are organized in the 32nd military division; the observation 
corps of the Ocean will have the first two companies of the 2nd battalion; the observation corps of Italy 
will provisionally have the six companies of the 9th battalion; finally the headquarters will have four 
companies of the 2nd battalion, six of the 10th and three of the 6th, total thirteen companies. 

In addition there will be two battalions of crews in the Comtoise and two teams of oxen. The 7th 
Battalion, with 230 cars, is attached to the Guard. The observation corps of Italy has, besides this, in its 
train an Italian transport battalion, organized like ours, forming 250 wagons, and a battalion of oxen, 
with 300 sails. The corps of Italy will therefore leave with the Hombre of following wagons: battalion of 
the 9th, 240 wings (forges and baggage not included); Italian battalion, 210; Italian cattle battalion, 300; 
total, 780 wagons. 

In summary, the Ist corps of the Elbe will have 240 wagons; the 2nd, 120; the ocean observation 
corps, 80; the reserve of the army, 300; the two battalions of Comtois, 1,200; the drawn battalions of 
oxen, 600; to which must be added the wagons leaving with the corps of Italy, 780; total, 3,520 wagons. 

It is necessary that there be a superior officer in charge of all the details of the transports and 
military crews, that you have a perfectly correct state, so that you can always give the orders for their 
loading in time, and that finally, the movement of all these battalions is carried on the states of situation 
which you give me. 

Send the Prince d'Eckmiihl to inform you when the companies he is to form, in execution of the 
decree of January 10, will be formed. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18500. - TO M. MAHET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, February 16, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano, the Sieur..... does not agree" 


224 


Page 225 


external relations. It is said that he has habits and tastes quite English, and that he loves and prefers to all 
the individuals of this nation; which, in a French agent, has serious disadvantages. The Sieur..... is not 
suitable; he lives in Copenhagen with a girl; he is extremely stingy and is no longer fit for this mission. 
Present me some topics to replace these two agents. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18501. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 18, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I have issued a decree for the arming of the Mecklenburg coast, the 32nd 
military division, the 31st and the 17th; send it to the commanders of the engineers and artillery without 
delay. 

It is necessary that the generals actively monitor the work and report on their progress. 

I keep only six batteries in the 32nd Military Division. There must be three coastguard 
companies; it is necessary to add two companies of creeper artillery, placing them essentially at the 
mouth of the Elbe, and sending detachments to the different batteries; 6 to 700 infantrymen seem to me 
sufficient for the batteries. The commanding generals will visit them every week; the general of the 
division will visit from March 15th to April Ist and will make sure everything is in order. 

The General of the 32nd Military Division will have three reserves: the first in range of the Elbe, 
the other of the Weser, the last of the Jahde. Assuming each of these reserves of 5 to 600 men with a 
hundred horses and two pieces harnessed, it would follow that with 2,000 men the ribs would be 
guarded; and as it is my intention to employ 8,000 men in the defense of the 32nd Division, there will 
remain 6,000 men and twelve pieces to contain Hamburg, and to carry where necessary. The Danes can 
also, in case of event, provide 8 to 10 thousand men. The general commanding the 31st division will 
have 500 men on the islands and 100 men on the battery of the Jahde; he will have 500 men on the 
coasts of his department: 1,000 men are therefore of an absolute necessity, with 1,000 men in 
Groningen, to reinforce Delfzyl and to carry wherever it is necessary.” 


225 


Page 226 


I have destined 3,000 men for the 31st military division. I also ordered the formation of three 
cohorts of 500 men. There are also three coastguard companies. A line company is essential for Delfzyl. 
The commander of this division must be instructed to defend Delfzyl, to throw in it, if necessary, his 
reserve of 2,000 men and a brigadier general. He will hold the campaign with the rest to join the 
Hamburg, Amsterdam and German reserves, and to raise the siege of Delfzvl. 

Delfzyl and Coeverden are the only two strongholds in this division; each brigadier general must 
remain scrupulously in his post. 

The general commander of the Ist military division has a much more important task to fulfill. 
Fort Lasalle depends on the fate of my squadron and that of the Zuiderzee. Already, for a month, I 
suppose that we are working on drawbridges, posterns, etc., so that in a month this fort must be able to 
sustain twenty days of open trench. If the deputy director had not done anything yet, he would be very 
guilty, because probably the fort will be attacked on May Ist. It is necessary that the commander of the 
17th Division immediately surrender to his post. 

Make known to General Molitor that in giving him this command I have given him a mark of 
great confidence; it is necessary that by his presence he activate everything. I also trust the engineer 
commander. There must be an good Artillery Commander. 

A brigadier general must be at Alkmaar, having the Helder under his command. At least 2,000 
men are needed to lock themselves in Fort Lasalle, including 200 at Nieuwe Diep or Fort Dugommier. 

Fort Morlaud will be held as much as possible. I desalinate a division of 12,000 men to defend 
Holland. 4,000 men will still stand between the Helder and Alkmaar. 2,000 will be shut up at Fort 
Lasalle, etc. 2,000 will form at Alkmaar the vanguard of the division of Holland; and, immediately 
afterwards, part of what is in the 32nd military division, and towards the Scheldt and Wesel, will arrive. 

Steps will be taken to have 40,000 men swiftly reunited between Alkmaar and Harlem. The 
genius must put the greatest activity into his labors. The commander-general must visit Fort Lasalle 
fortnightly. 

I gave the Zuiderzee general command to Admiral Dewinter.””° 





226 


Page 227 


He will have under his command twelve ships of the line and a hundred ships of the flotilla. He can help 
defend the land. But this force must not interfere with the development of the land forces. 

Naarden should be served lightly; I consider this place as the citadel of Amsterdam. Brielle and 
Hellevoetsluis, by their position, appear safe from attack. 

The admiral may temporarily supply, if necessary, the 200 men for the defense of the Helder; 
they would rejoin their ships as soon as the Helder was forced, as their service could no longer be useful 
in Fort Lasalle. 

The gunboats that are stationed at the mouth of the Meuse will protect Hellevoetsluis and lock 
themselves in. The crews will defend the batteries; the gunboats of Delfzyl will do the same. 

After Fort Lasalle; the vulnerable point of the 17th military division is Goeree Island. Do not 
think of Fort Tromp this year; we must think of Fort Duquesne and press his armament. A corvette must 
be parked between forts Duquesne and Ruyter, as last year. The gunboats would also provide garrisons 
to the batteries until the garrison of Willemstad returned to the island. 

20,000 men could be reunited in Willemstad and give every means to take back Goeree, if the 
commander did his duty and Fort Duquesne resisted. 

Thus the commander of the 32nd military division will have, independently of the 8,000 French, 
8,000 Danes and 8,000 men who would arrive in a few days from Germany; he would conduct, in the 
event's event, on Coeverden and Magdeburg all his evacuations and embarrassing objects. As there is no 
stronghold in this 32nd division, there is only Magdeburg and Cocverden for that. 

Delfzyl and Fort Lasalle are the points of resistance; Naarden is the citadel; Gorcum is the 
bridgehead; the island of Goeree, the support of the left; all these points must occupy all the solicitude of 
the commander of the 17th Military Division. 

I have issued a decree for the arming of Delfzyl, Fort Lasalle, Helder, Coeverden, Naarden, 
Gorcum, & c. I will let you know another day my ideas on the defense of the Scheldt. But it is necessary 
that the island of Cadzand, the forts Montebello and Saint-Hilaire, of Walcheren, as well as all the 
advanced works of Flushing, be able to support a siege on May Ist. There will be in Bruges and 
Antwerp a reserve to support all these positions. I suppose~”” 





227 


Page 228 


that artillery began to put pieces at Fort Lasalle, and that the engineers have begun the work of wood for 
the bridges and the posterns. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18502. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 18, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, order that the intendants, the prefects and sub-prefects I appointed for Catalonia 
have left next Sunday for their destination; warn the commanding generals in these provinces. These 
administrators must have no ridiculous pretensions; they must help the governors and not annoy them, 
and put regularity in the administration. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy, Depot of War, 


18503, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 18, 1812. 


Cousin, I think it right that you repeat my instructions to the Duke of Ragusa in the following 
terms, so send him a new officer no later than tomorrow. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


MARSHAL MARCONT, DUKE OF RAGUSA, 
COMMANDING THE ARMY OF PORTUGAL (1), 
Paris, February 18, 1812. 


Monsieur le Duke, I have just put under the Emperor's eyes your letters of the 29th of January, 
Ath and 6th of February. His Majesty is not satisfied with the direction you give to the war: you have 
superiority over the enemy, and, instead of taking the initiative, you keep receiving it, You move and 
tire your troops. This is not the art of war. When General Hill walks on 





1) The encrypted minute of this letter was found at the War Repository, as well as the number, which allowed to give here the 
translation. The text of this despatch appears in the Memoirs of the Duke of Ragusa, but with inaccuracies and even some 
misperceptions.”* 


228 


Page 229 


the army of the south with 15,000 men is what can happen to you happier; this army is strong and well 
organized enough to fear nothing of the English army, would it even have four or five divisions united. 

Today the enemy assumes that you are going to make the siege of Ciudad-Rodrigo; he is 
approaching General Hill on his right, so that he can be brought to him on a great march, and fight you 
together, if you wish to resume Ciudad-Rodrigo; it is, therefore, for the Duke of Dalmatia to keep 
20,000 men on the Guadiana and to prevent him from making this movement, and, if Hill passes the 
Tagus, to follow him or the Alentejo. You have the double of the letter which the Emperor ordered me 
to write to the Duke of Dalmatia on the 10th of this month, in answer to the request he had made to you 
to carry troops towards the south. It was you, Monsieur le Marechal, who had to write to him to ask him 
to carry a large body of troops on the Guadiana to keep General Hill in the south and prevent him from 
meeting with Lord Wellington. 

The taking of Ciudad -Rodrigo is a failure for you, and the English know enough French honor 
to understand that this success can become an affront to them, and that instead of improving their 
position the occupation of Ciudad-Rodrigo obliges them to defend this place; and from then on, they 
make you master of the choice of the field of battle, since you force them to come to the aid of this place 
and fight in a position so far from the sea. 

The result of this advantage can only be delayed until the harvest; then you will be able to make 
the seat of Ciudad-Rodrigo; the enemy will walk or be ashamed to see you take that place. 

The movement of General Hill on the Tagus was made in the belief that as soon as you would 
have known the capture of Ciudad-Rodrigo you would have gathered your troops to walk quickly on this 
city, to invest it and to profit from the first moment when the breach was not relieved, and there was still 
no supply. This opportunity being missed, we must prepare everything for the month of May. The real 
road to Lisbon is from the north; the enemy, having considerable stores and hospitals, can only retire 
from this capital very slowly, and if, in the attack on Prince Essling, he has withdrawn rapidly, it is 
because he had prepared for this movement. He has a great interest in preventing you from entering 
Portugal. The situation of the prince of Essling before Lisbon was for England and Portugal a great” 


229 


Page 230 


calamity. I can only repeat to you the Emperor's orders: take your headquarters at Salamauque; work 
with activity to fortify this city; have 6,000 troops and 6,000 peasants work there; gather there a new 
siege crew, who will serve to arm the city; form supplies there; have shots fired daily with enemy 
outposts; place two strong avant-gardes that threaten, one Almeida, the other Ciudad-Rodrigo; threaten 
the other directions on the border of Portugal; send parties that ravage some villages; finally, use 
whatever can keep the enemy on the alert. Repair the route of Porto, that of Almeida; hold your army 
together towards Toro, Benavente, Salamanca. The province of Avila even has good parts where 
resources can be found. In this situation as simple as it is formidable, you rest your troops, you form 
stores, and, with simple demonstrations well combined, which put your outposts able to fire daily shots 
with the enemy, you have bars on the English, who will not be able to observe you. You must every day 
make prisoners by your advance guards on all the directions which threaten the enemy; this is the means 
of hearing from the enemy; there is no other effective. 

The Emperor ordered me to order the Duke of Dalmatia to have a corps of 20,000 men with 
twenty guns, composed of his best troops, either on Merida to fire with the General's corps. Hill and 
contain him on the left bank of the Tagus, or on Badajoz by moving on the Alentejo and thus obliging 
him to approach Elvas. This operation is all the more important if, if it did not take place, General Hill 
could meet with Lord Wellington to attack you. It would be foolish to think that Lord Wellington could 
ever recall Hill's division as long as the Duke of Dalmatia made demonstrations. Lord Wellington can 
only attack you with his body, and if he marched to you, you would assemble seven divisions at 
Salamanca, with all your artillery and cavalry; that would make you 50,000 men. I say seven divisions, 
for one must never rely on that of Asturias; this division would then be ordered to march forward to 
threaten Galicia and to contain the Spanish corps which is on this side. Supported at Salamanca, having 
as much artillery and ammunition as you like, your army, with a strength of 50,000 men, is unassailable; 
General Hill was even united with Lord Wellington. It would be unassailable, not for 35,000 English, 
who, basically, are the total of what”? 





230 


Page 231 


the English have in Portugal without understanding the Portuguese, but for 70,000 English. A chosen 
camp, a secure retreat on the squares, cannons and ammunition in quantity are an advantage that you 
know how to appreciate too well. 

However, while you observe, I suppose that Hill has joined the English army, and that Lord 
Wellington is much stronger than he is: in this case the army of the north of Spain would arrive with his 
cavalry, and two divisions; you would strengthen yourself every day, and victory would be assured. But 
once the resolution is taken, it must be kept; there is no more neither if nor but; you have to choose even 
position under Salamanca, to be victorious or to perish with the French army in the battlefield that you 
will have chosen. 

As you are the strongest and it is important to have the initiative, avoid doing entrenched camp 
work, which only belong to the defense and warn the enemy. It will be enough to recognize the locations 
and work hard instead. If we take a tight fortification system and we do not admit too much 
development, in six weeks we can have a good place that puts your headquarters, your stores and your 
hospitals safe from any company of the enemy, and that can serve your rallying army corps to receive 
the battle, or starting point for walking on Ciudad-Rodrigo and Almeida when the time has come. 

I told you that you should only have seven divisions. 

The division of General Bonet must return immediately to Asturias. 

Whether you consider the preservation of all the northern provinces, or consider a retreat, 
without the Asturias, which assure the possession of the mountains, neither Salamanca nor Burgos, nor 
even Vitoria, are tenable; if, after a lost battle, it were necessary to evacuate, the division of Asturias 
should not even then be recalled to you; but, withdrawing with order on your right, she would support 
your retreat, and when you are at Burgos she would be at Reinosa to cover you on that side; otherwise, 
favored by landings on all points of the coast, the enemy, from the beginning of your retreat, you would 
fire shots at Mondragon and Vitoria. Besides, you have not only to fight against Lord Wellington, you 
have to contain also the enemy corps which is in Galicia and, at the moment when you march on the 
enemy, the division of Asturias will contain Galicia and will spare the presence of a division in 
Astorga, 


231 


Page 232 


I repeat to you, it is up to the army of the South to have a corps of 20,000 men to keep in check a 
portion of Lord Wellington's army on the left bank of the Tagus. It is not therefore for you, Monsieur le 
Duke, to disseminate yourself in favor of the Army of the South. 

When you were taking command of your army, he had just experienced a failure by his 
retirement from Portugal; this country was ravaged; the hospitals and the stores of the enemy were at 
Lisbon; your troops were tired, disgusted by forced marches, without artillery, without arms; Badajoz 
had been attacked for a long time; a battle in the south had not raised the siege of this place. What 
should you do then? to bring you on Almeida to threaten Lisbon? No, because even the army did not 
have any artillery, no arms, and was tired. The enemy, in this position, would not have believed this 
threat; he would have let him approach to Coimbra, take Badajoz, and then come upon you. So you did 
at that time what to do; you have marched rapidly to the aid of Badajoz, the enemy had bars on you, and 
the art of war was to concentrate on them: the siege was lifted and the enemy returned to Portugal; that's 
what there was to do. Since then, Monsieur le Marshal, you have returned to the north, Lord Wellington 
has returned to the true point of defense of the country, and since that time you have been present. 

If, after having rejected Lord Wellington beyond Ciudad Rodrigo, you had remained in the 
province of Salamanca, having your advanced guard on the directions of Portugal, Lord Wellington 
would not have moved; but you have gone without reason on the Tagus; the English thought that you 
were preparing to enter the Alentejo to assemble with the Duke of Dalmatia and to make the siege of 
Elvas; they maneuvered accordingly and remained attentive when your movement on Valencia made 
them aware that they had nothing to fear. 

At this moment, Mr. Duke, your position is simple and clear; therefore it does not require 
combinations of mind. Place even armed so that in four marches your troops can meet and group on 
Salamanca; have it even headquarters; that your orders, your dispositions, announce to the enemy that 
the heavy artillery is coming to Salamanca, that you are forming magazines there that everything is in 
the offensive position; Have the war with the enemy posts continually done. In this state you are master 
of all the English movements. If Lord Wellington goes on Badajoz, let him go; gather your?” 


232 


Page 233 


army and walk straight on Almeida; push parties on Coimbra, and be sure that Wellington will return 
soon to you. But the English have too much expertise to commit such a fault. It is not the sending of 4 or 
5,000 men to Valencia who has made the English move to seize Ciudad-Rodrigo, it is the march so 
useless that you have made a large part of even artillery, even cavalry; it is the dissemination of your 
army. 

Write to the Duke of Dalmatia and ask the King to write to him also to carry out the imperative 
orders that I give him to carry a corps of 20,000 men to force General Hill to remain on the left bank of 
the Tagus. Do not think then, Monsieur le Marshal, to go to the south, and march straight on Portugal if 
Lord Wellington makes the mistake of being on the left bank of the Tagus. 

The Caffarelli division must have arrived in Navarre; the Emperor orders that an Italian division 
come to reinforce the army of the North. Get in touch with Marshal Suchet in Valencia so that he can 
walk with his forces to support Madrid, if necessary. Take advantage of the moment your troops get 
together to organize and tidy the north. We work day and night to fortify Salamanca; that large pieces 
are brought there; that the siege crew is redone; lastly, that food stores are formed. You will feel, M. le 
Marshal, that by following these directions, and by putting all the proper activity to execute them, you 
will keep the enemy in check; London itself will tremble with the prospect of a battle and the invasion of 
Portugal, so dreaded by the English; and at the end of the harvest, you will find yourself in a position to 
invest Ciudad Rodrigo and take up this place under the English beard, or to give battle to them; which 
would be to be desired, because, beaten so far from the sea, they would be lost, and Portugal conquered. 
The artillery that would arrive to arm Salamanca would serve for Almeida and Ciudad-Rodrigo. By 
receiving the battle instead of giving it, thinking only of the army of the South, which does not need you, 
since it has 80,000 strong men. 

Overseas troops of Europe, having solicitude for the countries which are not under your 
command, abandoning Asturias and the provinces which look at you, a fight which you would 
experience would be a calamity which would be felt in all the Spain; a failure of the army of the South 
would lead it to Madrid or Valencia, and would not be of the same nature. 

I repeat, you are the master of keeping bars on Lord? 


233 


Page 234 


Wellington by placing your headquarters at Salamanca, occupying this position by force, and by making 
strong admissions on all the outlets; I can only repeat what I have already explained to you above. If 
Badajoz was surrounded only by two or three English divisions, the Duke of Dalmatia could unblock it; 
but then Lord Wellington, weakened, would enable you to carry yourself into the interior of Portugal, 
which would help Badajoz more effectively than any other operation. But when, by the new dispositions 
of the Emperor, which obliged him to renounce for this year the Portuguese expedition, in view of the 
turn of the general affairs of Europe, the Emperor has ordered you to go in Valladolid with your army, 
and that you have arrived at Salamanca, the English, who have calculated well that these movements 
could not be made. As a result of theirs, have been aghast, and if, from the 17th to the 18th, with the 
30,000 men that you had in your hand, you had marched without a battle, but a thousand of you wanting, 
the enemy, who was disconcerted by your arrival, was resolved to lift the siege of Ciudad-Redrigo. Who 
prevented you from carrying 25,000 men between Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo? It is an operation 
that could even be done with 9 or 10,000 men, taking a position without engagement and returning to 
Salamanca if the enemy had too much strength. War is a profession of positions, and 12,000 men are 
never engaged when they do not want it; all the more 30,000 men, and especially when these 30,000 
men were followed by other troops. But the past is without remedy. 

I give the order that all that it will be possible to provide you be provided to complete your 
artillery and to arm Salamanca. Twenty-four hours after the reception of this letter, the Emperor thinks 
that you will leave for Salamanca, unless there are unexpected events; that you will charge a vanguard to 
occupy the outlets on Ciudad-Rodrigo and another on Almeida; that you will have in the hand at least 
the value of a division; that you will return the cavalry and artillery which are in the division of the 
Tagus; that you will return the Bonet division in Asturias. You will not divide the Northern Army, 
because it will be reinforced by the Palombini division. 

However, as this movement will be abrupt, it must be given time to effect its effect, and it can 
not be till eight days after you have arrived at Salamanca, and that these dispositions will be leaked, that 
their effect will take place on the enemy; only then?** 





234 


Page 235 


you can completely evacuate the Tagus. Meanwhile, it seems to the Emperor that only one infantry 
division on this point is sufficient. The King will send at least 1,200 cavalrymen and 3,000 infantrymen 
to support this division. Gather, especially, your cavalry, which you do not have too much and which 
you need so much. When you see that your offensive movement has had its effect, you will remove from 
the Tagus first a brigade and then another brigade; at the same time you will increase your offensive 
demonstrations, so that you can not wait for the first herbs to enter Portugal. 

After the encrypted dispatch, War Repository. 


18504, - TO VICE-ADMRIAL COUNT MISSIESSY, 
COMMANDER SQUARDON OF ESCAUT, ANTWERP. 
Paris, February 18, 1812. 


Mr. Vice-Admiral Count Missiessy, we inform you that it is our intention that our squadron 
under your command will press its rearmament with all diligence, and that it will descend the Scheldt on 
the 1st of March next, so as to give the anxiety to our enemies by its presence at the mouth of the river, 
where it will have to be wet and able to sail by the 10th of March at the latest; a disposition which, 
independently of the other results we propose, will force the enemy to bear the gale of the equinox at 
sea. 

We particularly recommend that you print the greatest activity to the vessels under your 
command, and carry their reconnaissance out of the passes, so that they become familiar to the 
Commodores, captains and officers. 

We want the exit of our squadron to cease to depend exclusively on the employment of the river 
pilots, hearing that several officers of each vessel, and in particular our captains, acquire in this 
campaign the necessary knowledge to replace these pilots when necessary and to bring out our ships by 
themselves, with the proper precautions. 

Our letters patent of August 9, 1810, and the instructions, orders, and decrees which our Minister 
of the Navy has sent to you in the course of last year, have made known to us our intentions as to the 
measures you have to take in order to defense of the islands and the mouths of the rivers included in the 
extent of your command; but we find it useful to trace you : 





Page 236 


in this letter the various provisions which we have definitively decided upon these important objects. 

The meeting of our squadron of the Meuse in the Western Scheldt naturally determines us to 
assemble under your command all the part of the coasts whose defense was assigned to this squadron. 

As aresult, your authority with respect to maritime operations will extend from Brielle in the 
north to, and south of, the left bank of the Ecluse Canal. 

For this purpose, we order that it be assigned to our fleet of the Scheldt ninety-two gunboats or 
barges or boats gunners, which will be armed by detachments of the twenty-three crews of high-edge 
under your orders, which consequently, will be successively raised to a manpower of 600 men by the 
incorporation in these crews of the 13th of flotilla and the men we would have destined to form new 
ones. 

We have been disposed to this incorporation by this consideration that the sailors of these, being 
continually scattered on scattered buildings, are too deprived of the care and supervision of their 
superior chiefs, a disadvantage which will cease to exist to the same degree of the moment that 
belonging to a crew of high board they will not be more, as they will not be it indeed, only temporarily 
detached on gunboats, to be recalled to the corps at definite times, and whenever the interest of 
administration and discipline will demand it. 

Each crew under your command will have to arm three gunboats. 

The ninety-two gunboats or gunboats or barges, thus armed, will form three divisions, each 
vessel to supply a rowboat to each division. 

The Ist division will take the name of fleet division of the Scheldt; the second, that of division of 
the Meuse; the 3rd, the Wing Division. 


OF THE DIVISION OF THE ESCUT AND DEFENSE OF THE ISLANDS OF WALCHEREN AND 
SCHOUWEN. 


The Scheldt Flotilla Division will be responsible for the service of the passes of the two Scheldt, 
that of the islands of Walcheren, Cadzand and part of Schouwen. 

It will be commanded by a captain appointed by our Minister of the Navy. 

It will be divided between the Western Scheldt and the Eastern Scheldt.”°° 





236 


Page 237 


Six of the gunners of this division will be particularly placed under the command of the general 
of division commanding at Walcheren, to be employed by him to light the coast as he wishes, and to 
advance upon the points which the enemy would threaten. These six gunboats will provide this general 
officer with his private and independent means of communicating with the island of Cadzand and the 
island of Schouwen. 

The seventeen other gunners of this division will be under your command when you are at the 
mouth of the river; but, when you ascend east of Borssele, the whole division, as well as the brigs and 
corvettes, must be left near Walcheren, and remain there for as long as time permits, to enter the ports of 
Walcheren, and especially in that of Flushing, in case of need, this division being specially assigned to 
the defense of this place, and not having, whatever event may happen, having any other fate than that of 
the place itself. 

You will give instructions accordingly to the captain commanding this division (1). He will be 
put by our naval minister to the command of the commander of the island of Cadzand a naval officer 
with two cannoneers, three Caiques and three barges. 

There will be a corvette stationed between the mouth of the Eastern Scheldt and Zierikzee, and, 
in addition, six gunboats and six barges armed, but not equipped, at the disposal of the commander of 
this corvette, to be by him employed in as required by the circumstances. 

The commander of this corvette will make sure of all the means of transport which exist at 
Zierikzee, Nord-Beveland and all the coast, to be able quickly to reunite in the canal the number of boats 
necessary to go to the aid of Schouwen and Walcheren, if these islands were attacked. 

The commander of this corvette will send every day a report to the commanding general at 
Schouwen, and will assist the garrison with all his means. He will also send you frequent reports, being 
under your orders for the maritime operations, 

If the island of Schouwen was attacked, Tholen would have to go to his aid, and in this case the 
whole fleet of the two Scheldt 





1) "By a decree of February 27, 1812, the composition of this division is thus fixed: 2 boats or cannoneers, 4 barges. 
Boats from the country will be assembled as needed for a transport of 3,000 men on the island of Walcheren, (Note of the 
237 
copy.) 





237 


Page 238 


it would maneuver to facilitate the passage of help, while the flotilla of the Meuse would maneuver on 
the other side, as will be said hereinafter. 


DIVISION OF THE MEUSE AND THE DEFENSE OF THE SCHOUWEN AND GOEREE 
ISLANDS. 


The division of the Meuse will be charged with a part of the service of Schouwen and that of 
Goeree. 

It will be commanded by a Captain, appointed by our Minister of the Navy. 

You will divide it between Brouwershaven-Gat and the mouth of Haring- Vliet, so that one part is 
still between Schouwen and Goeree, and the other north of Goeree. 

This division will be under the command of the commanding general at Goeree, with regard to 
the particular service of this island, and under yours for the general movements. 

The superior naval officer who will command it will correspond daily with the commander of 
Goeree, and for this purpose, a gunboat will always be within reach to receive his orders. 

The military commander at Hellevoetsluis will also be expected to correspond with him and have 
at his disposal the means necessary to send to Goeree all the help that this island needs. 

A strong corvette will be stationed between Willemstad and Fort Duquesne, so as to protect the 
passage on the island of Goeree; this building, in case of attack, would be protected by the two batteries 
of forts Ruyter and Duquesne. It will serve as a cut in case of need to the Goeree garrison until Fort 
Duquesne is established. 

This vessel shall have under its command four gunboats and three boats for the service of the 
garrison of Goeree, and for the details of this service it shall be under the command of the general 
commanding the island, but under the command of the commander of the fleet of the Scheldt for general 
service. 

The officer commanding this corvette will also command the port and navy of Willemstad. 

It will be ensured in advance of all the means of transport that can offer the boats of the country 
to be able to carry as quickly as possible from Willemstad to Goeree. 

If the enemy threatens the island of Goeree, the military leader of Hellevoetsluis will take his 
measures to make it pass without delay all?*® 


238 


Page 239 


the troops that the commanding general at Rotterdam could send, as the commander of the corvette of 
Willemstad will pass all the troops of the 24th and 25th military division at Fort Duquesne at 
Ooltgensplaat. The commander of the flotilla will have to maneuver to facilitate these movements, and, 
if the enemy seized the island, to receive on board the whole garrison. 

In Willemstad there must be six gunboats and six barges, ready to be armed when needed by the 
country's sailors and the crew of the corvette, to be carried wherever necessary. 

If the island of Schouwen were threatened, the flotilla of the Meuse would be carried on this 
island, as that of the Scheldt would be on Goeree, if this one was threatened. 

If Hellevoetsluis was threatened, the flotilla of the Meuse must go to this place, shut up and 
follow his fate. 


OF THE DIVISION FLOTILLA OF THE WING, 


The fleet division of the squadron will be composed as the first, plus twenty-three barges; its 
destination is to exercise the seamen whenever the vessels and frigates are prevented from sailing; and in 
this case, it is advisable to keep them under sail whenever possible, especially with fresh winds and 
rough seas, in order to seize every opportunity to get young sailors accustomed to the movement of the 
sea and the exercise of maneuvers, 

These twenty-three gunboats and twenty-three barges will be a flotilla reserve at your disposal, 
to be employed, as circumstances warrant, wherever his presence may be useful, and to designate one or 
more senior officers of the squadron to command it, whenever it has to execute movements of 
instruction, attack or defense, 

You will use the barges to keep those of the enemy away from the coasts of Cedzand and 
Walcheren. 

Irrespective of the accounts to be given to you by the commanders of the two first divisions and 
those of the stations of Willemstad and Zierikzee, each of them will have to send directly to our Minister 
of Marine a weekly report on all matters of interest to the service. 

We reiterate to you, Vice-Admiral, the order to see that all the vessels of this flotilla are 


continually sailed, so that the crews may acquire all the instruction which this kind of navigation.”*” 





Page 240 


You will kindly give each of the Flotilla and Stationary Commanders all the detailed instructions 
which must follow from this, and you shall send a copy to our Minister of the Navy for presentation. 

We have not hereby intended to prescribe all the provisions which you will have to make for the 
defense of the coasts under your command, since they must depend on circumstances which can not be 
foreseen; but we expect that, some events which may occur, you will be able to employ the forces which 
will be entrusted to you in the manner most in accordance with the interest of our service and the honor 
of our arms. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Naval Archives. 


18505, - TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, February 19, 1812, 


The Duke of Bassano, you will receive a decree by which I order the demolition of houses and 
other buildings that hinder the fortifications of Magdeburg, You will send this decree to the King of 
Westphalia. It is necessary that the execution is prompt, because that the security of the place is 
compromised. It is necessary that the inhabitants have dislodged and that the roofs are discovered in the 
beginning of March, and that one destroys all these houses at the same time. The King will cede, as 
compensation to the owners, estates situated in the province of Magdeburg; I inserted this obligation in 
my decree. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18506, - TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 19, 1812. 


Count Mollien, I authorize you to negotiate your shares of the Canal du Midi at the rate of 
12,000 francs per share. At this rate, sell as many as there are buyers. Make exactly the payments to the 
treasure of the Crown, so that it does not form an embarrassment. Also set the price that can be made to 
give shares of the Loing Canal. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien.””° 





240 


Page 241 


18507. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 19, 1812. 


Cousin, you have not answered my fourth question: What is an ambulance division of the Guard? 
You tell me that it is composed of what is necessary for a division of 10,000 men; this is not enough; 
give me the details. 

For the 7th battalion of the crew train, is the clothing of the conscripts ready, so that the 
conscripts can have their clothes and their masses of linen and shoes forty-eight hours after their arrival? 

Do the 500 conscripts of the Guard's military crews have their clothes, and forty-eight hours after 
their arrival can they be provided? 

It appears that the 7th Battalion must receive 240 wagons. Write to the Minister of 
Administration to find out where these wagons are to be taken; it is necessary that they be returned to 
Metz or Mainz on | March, 

I refer you the answer of the authorizing officer, so that you put in the margins what exists and 
what must be the complete in men, in horses, in harnesses and in wagons of any kind. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria, 


18508, - TO MARSHAL BESSIERES, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 19, 1812, 


My Cousin, let the 3rd grenadier regiment march from my Guard, tomorrow, the 20th, for Metz, 
without passing it through Paris. This regiment will take with it its artillery and caissons. 

Order the Polish light horse to go to Compiegne tomorrow 20. You will send them to Compiegne 
the order to go to Mainz by the shortest route, without however passing through Metz, this road being 
sufficiently congested. Keep the secret so that the Poles do not know where they are going. I do not need 
to say that they will take with them their forges, caissons and everything that belongs to them. 

You will order a detachment of 150 of my chasseurs 7“ 


241 


Page 242 


to go to Compiégne, as well as a detachment of 50 elite gendarmes. From Compiegne, all this will leave 
for Mainz. 
Take care that these movements are done at night and that the troops do not know where they are 
going. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria. 


18509. - DECISION. 
Paris, February 19, 1812 








The grand judge, Minister of Justice, The Emperor decides that in France 
submits to the Emperor a report concerning | these liters will not be recognized, and he 
the French, who, being in the service of a orders that, in the Imperial Almanac, they 
foreign power, accept honorary titles, are designated under their name, the 
family, or under their name of land, but 
dirty title. 











According to the copy. Archives of Justice. 


18510, - DECISION, 
Paris, February 19, 1812. 








The Minister of the Navy submits to Referred to the high judge, to arrest the 
the Emperor the contribution of the captain general Ernouf, Colonel Madiez, 
investigative council to General Ernouf and | who commanded the Saintes, and the other 
Colonels Cambriel and Madiez, individuals who remain prejudiced in this 


affair as a result of the report of the council 
of inquiry; have the seals affixed to their 
papers, and bring them before the courts, in 
accordance with the laws of the Empire. 











From the original. Archives of the Empire. 


18511. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 21, 1812. 
reception of your letter, the two 
C divisions of cuirassiers will meet at 

ousin, Magdeburg; the whole Gudin division 
give the will meet in Magdeburg.” 
order to 
Prince 
Eckmiihl 
to begin, 
his 
movemen 
t without 
delay. For 
this 
purpose, 
twenty- 
four 
hours 
after the 





242 


Page 243 


The Artillery Park and the Engineering Park will start from Minden via the Mecklenburg on Stettin, or a 
march from this town. The division Gudin must pass the Elbe on the 29th, if possible, and move on 
Stettin, This movement will be done by three columns: Ist column, the brigade light cavalry General 
Piré, an infantry regiment and several cannon batteries; 2nd column, a division of cuirassiers with its 
artillery and an infantry regiment; 3rd column, the 3rd division of cuirassiers. All this must happen as 
soon as possible to Stettin. At the same time, the division of cuirassiers which is in Erfurt will be carried 
on Magdeburg; the prince of Eckmiihl will leave it on the Elbe, unless unforeseen circumstances. 

The Morand division will start with its artillery and crews and will approach Stettin at two steps. 

The division at Rostock will be able to start later; he will go to two steps of Stettin. 

From the 5th to the 10th of March, Prince d'Eckmiihl's corps d'armee must be entirely in his 
hands, namely: his headquarters at Stettin; the Dessaix division at Kiistrin, having a regiment at Glogau, 
the four other divisions, one at Stettin, one at Prenzlow, one at Anklam, one at Strelitz or any other 
place, but being able in two days, after having received the order, pass the Oder to Stettin. 

General Bruyére's Light Cavalry Division will be on the right of the Oder, covering the entire 
Oder from Kiistrin to Slettiu, pushing positions on the Kolherg, Landsberg, and Danzig Rollers, and 
communicating with the Pajol Brigade, which is ahead. 

The 2nd light cavalry brigade will be at Kiistrin, occupying Landsberg and communicating with 
Poseu and the Bruyeére division. General Bruyére will have his headquarters at Stargard. 

The cuirassiers will be placed along the Oder, in Schwedt for example, and in the places where 
they will be best fed. I suppose they have their carabiners, their cartridges, and they can keep themselves 
in their quarters. 

General Carra Saint-Cyr, who commands the 32nd Military Division, will be under the orders of 
Prince Eckmiihl, and will report to him on everything. He will have the princely division to guard the 
Mecklenburg and the 32nd military division. 

It is important, in executing this movement, that no man passes the Oder before the 8th of March. 
Thus, on the 8th of March, the Prince of Eckmiihl must have his corps grouped on the Oder, the light 
cavalry must pass the Oder, and the Prince of Eckmiihl arrive from his person stationed at Stettin, with 
his headquarters.*”° 





243 


Page 244. 


General Gudin, crossing Prussia, will cross it with the proper precautions. 

The contingent of Mecklenburg may still remain on the side of Rostock, and may be 
given a few days to join it. 

In a letter which I will write to you tomorrow, I will inform you of the course to be taken 
towards Prussia. 

The Prince of Eckmihl will therefore have under his command five infantry divisions, 
the 1st reserve corps of cavalry, commanded by General Nansouty, his two brigades of light 
cavalry, the 7th Infantry Division, which is at Danzig, and the contingents of Mecklenburg, 
which will make him, all inclusive, an army of 100,000 French. The Saxon corps will also be 
under his command. Independently of this, it will have the entire Daendels division, consisting of 
the brigades of Wiirzburg, Hesse, and Baden, forming 15,000 infantry and 1,500 cavalry men. 
He will use this division to keep Swedish Pomerania and Mecklenburg. He will keep a battalion 
of each nation ready to enter Kiistrin as soon as the Dessaix division leaves the place. 

The Prince of Eckmiihl will form a depot, according to custom, which will consist of the 
sickly and crippled men of the regiments of his divisions, and who will remain at Stettin with six 
battalions of the Daendels division, who will not come to Stettin until the moment to go forward 
will have arrived. 

The 85th, which is at Glogau, will be ready to go to Posen as soon as the Dessaix division 
atrives in that city. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18512. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 21, 1812, 


The Major General will write to the Duke of Ragusa that he misunderstood my intentions 
on Valencia; that I ordered to make march on that place 12,000 men, including the troops of the 
army of the Center; that I heard that this movement would be made by Cuenca; that there were 
already at Cuenca 4,000 men; that the King would give 3,000 others, and that it was, therefore, 3 
or 4,000 men of the army of Portugal to be sent to Cuenca; that his complaints are unfounded; 
that it would have been foolish for the King to go from Cuenca to Albacete; that this move would 
have allowed him the enemy, who was a 





244 


Page 245 


Requefia, to march on Madrid; that it was evident that this operation of Albacete could not be 
done without immense forces, since it required a great line of operation, and that it would not 
have given any result for the capture of Valencia; for if Marshal Suchet had been beaten at the 
passage of the lines, this operation meant nothing; that the art of war does not consist in dividing 
one's troops; that the operation of Cuenca by Requefia, communicating by the left with Marshal 
Suchet before attacking the enemy, was a real military operation; that 3,000 more men with 
General Darmagnac would not have weakened the army of Portugal; that the English would not 
have noticed it; that this operation could even have been accomplished by sending troops from 
the Central Army and replacing by troops of the Army of Portugal the troops which would have 
gone to Cuenca; that, doubtless, the road to Cuenca is not good for the artillery, but that there 
was no need for artillery against the insurgents, and that Marshal Suchet had some; that it is a 
fault of the Duke of Ragusa which is not justifiable, since he was before the enemy, and it is 
evident that he exposed all the north of Spain; that, had it been necessary to make a great army 
operation, it would have been preferable to have it done by the Duke of Dalmatia, and it would 
have been foreseen that the English might have marched on Madrid or Salamanca. 

According to the minute. Deposit of the war. 


18513. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 21, 1812. 


The Major General will write to the Duke of Ragusa that I have read his letters of the 6th 
of February; that I am extremely sorry that he sent Bonet's division to the army of the North; that 
this division is the only one which can occupy with advantage Asturias, because the soldier 
knows Spain and the inhabitants; that it was better not to send anything to the army of the North, 
and to send Bonet's division to Asturias; that it is my intention that, wherever she may be, she 
return to that province; that for the North it is better to have Bonet's division in Asturias than in 
Burgos; that the army of Portugal is in the air; and that communication with Irun is not tenable, if 
one does not have Asturias; that Asturias must be occupied when we are at the height of 
Salamanca, and occupy the line of Potes and? 





245 


Page 246 


Reynosa when one is at the height of Valladolid or Burnos; but that to leave the peasants masters 
of the mountains, communicating with the sea, is the greatest misfortune that can happen in 
Spain; that the population of Galicia will return to the provinces occupied by the army; that 
experience has proved this theory, that when the Duke of Istria evacuated Asturias, the whole 
country was in motion; that it takes 6,000 men to keep the mountains, that they are placed in 
Asturias or Santander. it is the same thing, with this difference that by placing them at Santander 
they do not cover the kingdom of Leon and do not occupy that province, which is the most 
important for the insurgents; that I place at his disposal the Bonet division for this purpose; let 
him direct it to Asturias by the way General Bonet will judge the best; that you have informed 
him that his Majesty does not approve the dissemination of his army; that she sees in her conduct 
only trial and error. How, in Valladolid, does he claim to be informed in time of what the enemy 
will do? This is not possible in any country and especially in an insurgent country. How will it 
prejudge what the enemy will do in Valladolid? That you can only repeat to him that his Majesty 
sees an honorable operation for his arms as to occupy Salamanca, to have light vanguards firing 
on the frontiers of Portugal and with Ciudad-Rodriao, to have his army centralized around him at 
four or five steps, that, until the Army of the Center was able to set up troops, at Almaraz, that 
the army of Portugal should occupy Salamanca and that the Operation of the Duke of Dalmatia 
on Merida and Badajoz has influence over the enemy and made himself felt, he can leave a light 
division, ready to join him on Tulavera, occupying Almaraz; that when he has occupied 
Salamanca, that his outposts will have taken this direction, and that this kind of military blister 
will have had an effect on the enemy, he may have the division which he has left on the Tagus, 
and that the Army of the Center will be able to give troops to guard the valley; that he deals too 
much with that which does not concern him, and not enough with that which regards him; that 
his mission was to defend Almeida and Ciudad-Rodrigo, and that he allowed these places to be 
taken; that he has the north to maintain and administer, and that he abandons Asturias, that is to 
say, the only means of governing and containing it; that he will embarrass himself if Lord 
Wellington sends one or two divisions on Badajoz, when Badajoz is a very strong place and that 
the Duke of Dalmatia has 80,000 men, when he can be rescued by Marshal Suchet, finally when, 
if Lord Wellington walked on Badajoz, he has a sure, prompt and**° 


246 


Page 247 


triumphant to remind him, to walk on Ciudad-Rodrigo and Almeida. 

That his army is composed of eight divisions; that a division must remain in Asturias; 
that he must count only to make her march on Galicia; that, even if after a battle with the English 
he should be defeated, he must not evacuate Asturias by this division, but make it pass by the 
mountains to his rights, that the shots will arrive in a few days at Mondragon, if we do not 
occupy the mountains; that the division of Asturias is a division which, in case of evacuation of 
Salamanca, from Valladolid, should follow the movement in the mountains, otherwise the 
position of Burgos would not be tenable, not even that of Vitoria; that besides, once more, he has 
to fight not only against the English army, but also against Galicia; that these 6,000 men, who 
would march forward through the outlets of Galicia, will contain this province; that it may be 
said that 6,000 men in Asturias amount to 18,000 more than at Astorga and on the coast; that the 
insurgents, without communication after the capture of Valencia, were in despair; that the arrival 
of the bands at Potes and Oviedo and the reestablishment of their communications with the sea 
has restored their courage; and all this by default of reflection and knowledge of localities. 

That in summary, from his eight divisions one must be in Asturias and not move; that the 
other seven must be gathered around Salamanca; which made him an army of 50,000 
Frenchmen, with an artillery of a hundred pieces of cannon, which in the studied soil, covered 
with arrowheads, having their provisions assured and their support at Salamanca, would not be 
conquered by 80,000 men. ; that, however, one must be careful not to make an entrenched camp 
at Salamanca; that the English would believe it on the defensive, and have no more fears, and 
that it is a stronghold which must be had in Salamanca. 

According to the minute. Deposit of the war. 


18514. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 22, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Duke of Elchingen to carry his headquarters to Erfurt, from the 5th 
to the 10th of March. The 2nd Reserve Cavalry Corps, composed of General Wattier's Light 
Cavalry Division” 





247 


Page 248 


and the two cuirassier divisions of Generals Sebastiani and Defrance, will be under his 
command. 

The division of light cavalry commanded by General Wattier will set in motion, so as to 
cross the Rhine at Mainz on the 27th, and proceed to Weimar. This division will have its 
batteries of light artillery with it, and its movement will take place by brigade. The Sebastiani 
division will be able to cross the Rhine at Coblenz and head for Weimar. The Defrance division 
will be able to cross the Rhine in Diisseldorf and go to Paderborn and from there to Leipzig. All 
the artillery of these two divisions of cuirassiers which is at Wesel will leave it on the 28th with 
the park of the cavalry reserve, and will march on Paderborn, where it will meet at the division 
of cuirassiers of the general Defrance, and will march under its protection up to Leipzig. The 
infantry division at Mainz, with the Army Corps Park, will set out on the 28th and will move to 
Erfurt. The park will stay in Gotha. 

The infantry division at Dusseldorf and the Portuguese regiment at Coblenz, which will 
join the division at Dusseldorf, will proceed to Paderborn and thence to Leipzig. 

It is necessary that the Duke of Elchingen send the situation of each regiment and its 
artillery, military crews and all the artillery of the corps. You will make known to this marshal 
that his corps must pass the Elbe to Wittenberg. Recommend to him to march his troops gently, 
so as not to tire his horses. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18515. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 22, 1812 


Cousin, let the king of Westphalia know that his army corps is to be assembled from the 
10th to the 15th of March at Halle, that no Westphalian troops should occupy Brunswick, 
Magdeburg, or the environs; that he can occupy Halle and the count of Dessau, and that his corps 
is destined to cross the Elbe to the bridge of Dessau. 

You will take care to inform the king of Westphalia of the movement of the various 
troops crossing his states. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war,”** 


248 


Page 249 


18516. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 22, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Prince Eckmiihl that he should not allow the two regiments in Pomerania 
to return to Sweden; that he must not allow Colonel Peyron to return to Sweden; that he must not 
receive the new governor who comes from Sweden; that the reason for this is very simple is that 
all communication with Sweden is forbidden; that any individual who comes from Sweden to 
Pomerania should be sent to his headquarters; that apart from the allied troops he must 
temporarily leave a French regiment in Pomerania; that the division which is in Pomerania must 
be the last to move, since it is nearest to Stettin; that even when she walks, he must always leave 
a brigade in Pomerania. You will instruct the Prince of Eckmiihl to reiterate the instruction not to 
suffer in Pomerania any communication whatsoever with Sweden. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18517. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 22, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke of Reggio to set Legrand's division in motion, as soon as the 
present order is received, and to direct it to Magdeburg; to set in motion the Verdier division and 
to direct it over Brunswick; to set up the Belliard division and to direct it to Miinster; to take up 
his headquarters at Magdeburg, where it is necessary that he be returned on the 5th of March; to 
assemble on the Elbe the 3rd division of cuirassiers commanded by General Doumerc, who, until 
further notice, will be part of his army corps. The light cavalry brigade of General Castex, which 
is in Pomerania, will be part of the Duke of Reggio's corps, but it will remain in Pomerania until 
further notice; the Duke of Reggio will send to acknowledge his situation. As soon as 
Corbineau's brigade has arrived, he will direct it to Magdeburg; he will also run his park on 
Magdeburg. The Duke of Reggio will have in his hand the divisions Legrand and Verdiere, and a 
division of cuirassiers at Magdeburg and Brunswick. When I am informed of the day when the 
Belliard division arrives in Minster, I reserve the right wr 





249 


Page 250 


orders for his subsequent movement. The Belliard division has a Swiss regiment in Strasbourg; 
this Swiss regiment will go straight from Strasbourg to Magdeburg and through Wurzburg, 
according to the orders I will give. Inform him of this, and will disturb him Belliard and the 
Duke of Reggio. 

The three companies of the 6th battalion of military crews, which the Prince of Eckmihl 
was ordered to form, will be attached to the 2nd observation corps of the Elbe, and it is necessary 
that the Duke of Reggio give them orders and speed up their progress. write it to the Prince of 
Eckmiihl and the general commanding the 32nd Military Division. 

You will order that the 5th Battalions of the 56th and 19th and the 4th Battalion of the 
123rd join their regiments as they pass through Magdeburg. The thirdly will be between all the 
battalions. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18318. - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DE LA RIBOISIERE, 
COMMANDING THE ARTILLERY OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 23, 1812. 


Count de la Riboisiére, commander of the artillery of the Grande Armée, I need to know 
if the artillery is ready to satisfy the different orders that I give to the corps d'armee. 

The Ist corps of the Elbe, with the Ist corps of the cavalry reserve, sets in motion at the 
end of the month to arrive in the early days of March on the Oder. Minden Park follows this 
movement and goes to Stettin. 

The 2nd corps, with the division of cuirassiers which belongs to the 3rd corps of the 
cavalry reserve, is also set in motion at the end of this month, and is proceeding to Magdeburg. 

The 3rd Corps or Observation Corps of the Ocean, commanded by the Duke of 
Elchingen, crosses the Rhine at the end of this month and heads for Leipzig and Erfurt. The 2nd 
corps of the cavalry reserve follows this movement. The park has to go to Gotha. 

The 4th corps opens with Innsbruck with the 8th corps of the cavalry reserve, and in the 
first days of March it will be on Regensburg. 

Ihave not yet given any orders to the Army General Park or to the deck crew. I wish to 
receive from the artillery a report which informs me if all the preparatory movements of the 
equipment, the personnel and the teams have been made so that everything is at his post and that 
the service can be done according to the rigor of the organization. 


250 


Page 251 


If there are some wagons to leave behind not hitched, I want to know what is the number, what 
kind of wagons and when they will be hitched to join. Is there a general park, or have we all 
confused with each corps? Is there a general park for the cavalry reserve, as has been the case in 
previous wars, or is there only one park attached to each corps of the cavalry reserve? Finally, 
when will the deck crew and teams be able to cross the Rhine? how many horses will there be? 
how many wagons? what will be loaded on these wagons? when will they be able to pass the 
Rhine? Is the equipment of the siege crews ready in Danzig and Magdeburg, as well as the staff? 
Where will they be on April 1? 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Count de la Riboisiére. 


18519. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 23, 1812. 


Count Cessac, I do not see that arrangements are made to go take the wagons that are 
built in the arsenals, either war or navy, and it seems to me that we lose precious time. Leak me a 
report on that. It is very necessary that all that can leave, because the transports will be to one or 
two months of the army. Let me know if the companies of the 2nd battalion of the military 
crews, who were to leave Sampigny with new model wagons, have left; if they are not, and you 
have to delay their departure, have them leave with old wagons. 

NAPOLEON, 
According to the original. Deposit of the war. 


18520. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 23rd-1812. 


Cousin, let me know where is the major inspector of the military crews. It would be nice 
if he were near you. He is aman who becomes important. You have received the decree by 
which I have sent him for the inspection two chiefs of battalion and two adjutants, captain and 
lieutenant. Introduce me this major, whom l 





251 


Page 252 


wants to know, and that he gets to know the service, the situation and the distribution of the 
battalions. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18521. - TO CAPTAIN HAUTPOUL, 
OFFICER OF ORDER OF THE EMPEROR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 23, 1812. 


Monsieur d'Hautpoul, leave without delay to fulfill the mission which will be indicated 
to you in the note attached. 
NAPOLEON. 


NOTE TO MY ORDER OFFICER HAUTPOUL. 

See you in Metz. You will visit the personnel, equipment and artillery teams that are to 
be attached to the Guard reserve. You will also visit the battalions of military crews who are in 
Metz. You will go to Sampigny. You will see this establishment in detail, and you will let me 
know how many trolleys there are; what are the cadres of battalions of military crews, and 
already trained and who arrived there; what is the quantity of new model trolleys already made, 
and how much can be supplied on March Ist. 

When you have spent six days in Metz, you will go to Mainz, and you will also see the 
situation of the General Park of the Army, either artillery or engineering, equipment, personnel 
and teams. As the Duke of Elchingen's corps is going to make a movement, see in what situation 
the various divisions of artillery leave, 

You will write to me every day, from Mainz, what will come to your knowledge about 
the strength of the troops, the way they are equipped, their health, theirs! armament, etc. 

From the original comm. by General Marquis d'Hautpoul. 


18522. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS, 
Paris, February 24, 1812. 


Cousin, send to Prince Eckmiihl to reform no man; but that all men must follow to 
Stettin, and that there, at the passage of the Oder, he will be formed, as he always has.” 





252 


Page 253 


in the use of the Grande Armée, a depot of old men, infirm and incapable of campaigning; the 
sick out of the hospitals will join, and that will form a battalion of a thousand men, which will 
be useful to Stettin; and when it is time for it, an inspector will be sent there to review those 
who are unable to serve even in this place. 

As for the horses marked for the reform, in time of war one must not reform any horse 
that beforehand the colonel did not obtain one to replace it. Only with this precaution can we 
reform; and in any case, the replacement must precede. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18523. - TO ALEXANDER I, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA, 
SAINT PETERSBURG. 
Paris, February 24, 1812. 


Sir, after the arrival of the letter which Earl Lauriston sent on the 6th of this month, I 
decided to talk with Colonel Czernitchef about the unfortunate business that had been going on 
for fifteen months. It depends only on your majesty to finish everything. I beg your Majesty 
never to doubt my desire to give him proof of the distinguished consideration I have for him. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the government of His Majesty the Emperor of Russia, 


18524. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 26, 1812. 


Cousin, I send you a letter from Prince Eckmiihl. Tell him that he seems to have heard 
that Stralsund has been found. There must be some; that we do research. If it were not there, it is 
indispensable that we send about twenty guns in iron, in order to arm especially the Stralsund 
coast, to ensure the communication with the island of Rugen, It is necessary to establish in this 
island, at the point where the canal is the narrowest, a recess which can give refuse to the 
garrison if the enemy landed, to return to Stralsund, or which allows him to receive help to 
tumble the enemy who would have landed. The prince” 


253 


Page 254 


from Eckmiihl will send six or eight cannoneers there; there must be some in Lubeck; if it is not 
at Liibeck, it may be passed through Denmark, or, better still, send sailors to Stralsund, and have 
these vessels established there. Make these dispositions known to General Chasseloup, and order 
him to send an engineer officer with instructions to fulfill my intentions. We must work on this 
with a busy activity. Enemy boats or barges must never be placed between Stralsund and the 
island of Riigen. You will also be instructing in street intentions the general commanding the 
artillery of the army. It is necessary to place one of the artillery companies destined for the park 
in Pomerania to serve the batteries, and several artillery officers to organize this service. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18525. - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DE LA RIBOISIERE, 
COMMANDING THE ARTILLERY OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 26, 1812. 


General Comte la Riboisiére, I receive your report of the 24th. I approve that each of the 
three cavalry corps should have their park, and that, consequently, the thirty pieces of light 
artillery attached to each of these corps should have their own double supply, regardless of the 
general fleet. 

Make me make the state of the arms, either rifles, carbines, or pistols, necessary both to 
arm the cavalry (because the cavalry is armed with carabiners and rifles) than to be able to 
provide the infantry under unforeseen circumstances. 

I do not think it's fitting that the year's bodies have only one and a half supply. I think 
they should be left with their entire supply, since the bodies can operate at a distance from each 
other such that they can not be reached with the park. 

In winter or refreshment areas, horses, both Guard and Guard Reserve, and deck crews 
and siege crews, can be used for extraordinary movements. The reserve of the Guard will 
actually form the park. Thus the park would consist of only sixty spare fire hydrants, spare 


c : ‘ ‘ . 254 
carriages, a few park caissons and a good number of infantry caissons. As you will experience i 


254 


Page. 255 


several campaigns in the same country, I will wait for your report on this before making a final 
decision. 

I want the bridge crew to talk about Strasbourg or Mayence, hitching wagons or artillery 
carts, which can then be used by the siege crews. I would like these wagons to be loaded with 
pioneering tools and rifles; we have enough powder. I see that the deck crew has horses at 
Wesel, Mainz, Strasbourg; have the condition of the artillery carts which these horses can take in 
each of these places, and the quantity of tools, arms, rifles, carbines, swords, which may be 
loaded on them. I do not hear the deck crew providing anything to the field crew, because, once 
these horses have left with the field crew, I will have nothing, and I will find it without a deck 
crew. The pioneering tools to be left at Danzig, the horses of the deck crew will leave the cars for 
the siege crew there and serve the deck crew. So I do not see much inconvenience in having 
these horses hitched up trucks, carriages, and other carriages for siege crews, although I think 
these sails should be built in Gdansk. Do you agree with General Chasseloup? 

Ihave told you that the two heavy cavalry divisions which are at Bonn and Cologne are 
going to Leipzig and Weimar, so the artillery of these two divisions must be at the same time in 
these cities. It is necessary that the park of the Ist corps of cavalry is with this corps with the 
corps of observation of the Elbe, and that the park of the 2nd corps goes to Weimar, where will 
be united the 2nd corps of cavalry. 

Give me statements of the artillery personnel, appointing the colonels, majors and 
battalion commanders, so that I know the officers who will be present on the first walls and those 
who will join only in the course of March. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original comm. by the Count de la Riboisiére, 


18526. - NOTE TO M. BARBIER, 
LIBRARY OF THE EMPEROR, PARIS. 
Paris, February 26, 1812 


The Emperor wishes to replace in his library novels and most of the poems by works of 
history. I pray” : 


255 


Page. 256 


Mr. Barbier to gather a selection of such works and send me, meanwhile, a History of France, 
Velly, completed until the revolution. His Majesty wishes to read that history. 
The Secretary to the Cabinet, 
Meneval. 
From the original comm. by Mr. Louis Barbier. 


18527. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 27, 1812. 


Comte de Cessac, I am responding to your report of 22 February on the returns. I see that 
you propose a new distribution for the returns to be made in Germany. It seems to me that there 
would be some inconvenience in making new arrangements before being sure that the first ones 
are executed. In Germany I asked for 8,300 horses, namely 1,300 riflemen and cuirassiers, 640 
dragons, 2,175 light horses, 4,210 hunters and hussars; total, 8,323; which, with the 300 of the 
Imperial Guard, makes 8,600 horses, just for the cavalry. For these 8,600 horses, I sent to 
Germany 5,900 men; it will therefore still be necessary to send 2,000 men on foot. I must be sure 
to get these 8,600 horses before making any changes to the arrangements made. The only 
measure to be taken at present is to send 230 Portuguese chasseurs to Hanover on foot, with their 
saddles, and, consequently, on the 500 horses which were ordered for them at Epinal, from give 
250 to other corps. What would be equally important was to make the state, what each regiment 
was to send to Germany as a consequence of the decree of the 19th of January, and of the men 
who left, with the time of their departure, so as to determine what was sent on February 15 in 
men, saddles, bridles, etc., in order to see at a glance what is lacking and what the depots of the 
regiments still have to supply in men, saddles, & c. I received the news that the King of 
Denmark had consented to the release of 6,000 horses from Holstein without paying duty. As 
soon as General Bourcier deploys all these means, and we become acquainted with the result of 
the various requests made, we will be able to see if it is necessary to make leave for Germany 
new detachments of men on foot and new shipments of harnesses. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.” 





256 


Page 257 


18528. - TO COUNT DARU, 
MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 27, 1812. 


Count Daru, I send you the documents of the commission of inquiry (1). Please read them 
carefully to make a report. You will make a collection bound together, to which you will add the 
request, made by Count Regnaud, of the convocation of the High Court, my letter to the 
Archchancellor (2) on what he tells me that the meeting of the High court has disadvantages, my 
decree for the formation of the board of inquiry, the interrogations and finally the answers of the 
defendants. You will put that in front of me, so that I can make a final decree on this affair. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by Count Daru. 


18528. - NOTE FOR COUNT DARU, 
MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 27, 1812. 


I want Count Daru to see, the Minister of War or the offices to arrive at the following 
result: 

I have a lot of Spaniards; the fact is that in the middle of Germany they are more French 
than German. I have not had to repent of the Portuguese I have, and hear nothing but the good of 
the Spaniards who have existed for a year in Italy and Germany. It is necessary to know if I did 
not create a new regiment of infantry; I think I have created a new battalion of sappers. 

This is what I would like to do. I want a handsome cavalry regiment; the soldiers exist; as 
for the officers, they would be: the colonel, French; the officers, half French, half of those who 
took the oath. I will only take men who have served in the Spanish cavalry. There is a regiment 
which has been disarmed after the Romana affair, and which must furnish subjects. As soon as 
these men were dressed in the least expensive fashion, and yet so as to recognize them at a 
glance, they would be sent to Germany, where they would go back. 

What officers, good cavalry officers, have taken the oath? 

I have very fine companies of light artillery; I do not believe 





1) On the surrender of General Dupont at Builen. 
2) See Exhibit 18497.7°’ 


257 


Page 258. 


that it would be advisable to create Spanish artillery companies, but I would have no objection to 
attaching to each regiment of artillery on horseback a sergeant and a squad of fifteen men. We 
would take ready-made gunners; they would amalgamate, and if that succeeds, we would extend 
this measure. 

The same thing could be done for all the artillery: 1 officer, 2 sergeants and 25 or 30 men 
per regiment, if we have Spanish artillery officers who have taken the oath. 

Finally, the same thing for the train battalions. To each company of the train would be 
added 10 or 12 men of the Spanish train; that would not form new corps; they would be watched 
by the mass. 

The execution of this measure would take place without delay. If that succeeds, we would 
put in every infantry company a tenth of Spaniards. I already have Romans, Tuscan, and that's a 
wonderful success. 

I prefer to start with gunners and train soldiers, because they are corps that have a spirit 
apart and desert less. 

Who would still prevent to make a battalion of Spanish military crews, by giving him 
some officers and some French supervisors? Those men accustomed to serve horses would do 
their service well and spare me from the French. 

If these measures were successful, I would find myself having a result of 80,000 men 
who would recruit my army and attach the population of Spain to me, for, having fought with the 
French, they would find themselves entirely French. 

One could even take the regiment of the Mediterranean which is in Toulon, to bring the 
frame in the North and fill it with Spaniards. The officers and non-commissioned officers would 
be French, of course; only one third of Spanish NCOs would be placed, and some Spanish 
officers would be amalgamated. One could organize the regiment of the Mediterranean and some 
battalions of that of Walcheren, and thus have six battalions; Of course, none of this would 
remain in France and everything would follow the army. 

I would like to hear a discussion on this. 

In amalgamating the Spaniards with the French, there is the inconvenience that, if that 
does not succeed, there will be deserters in all the regiments, which is unpleasant; however, 10 
men per company would make only 60 men per battalion, and by choosing them good subjects, 
the desertion would be less or would not affect. While having”* 





Page 259 


all Spanish regiments with French officers, they are regiments that one tries, on which one does 
not count. 

I asked men to organize three crews of oxen; if I wanted to put a third of Spaniards 
among those who know how to drive the oxen, I could make four battalions; that would employ 
500 Spaniards. 

I asked for two battalions in the comtoise, if I wanted to put a third of Spaniards, it would 
make me enough to form three battalions instead of two, taking among those who are 
accustomed to this trade, it would employ me 700 Spaniards. 

I have six battalions of military crews; putting 100 per battalion would make another 600 
Spaniards. This would make a total of 1,800 Spaniards among those who are used to this service. 

From unsigned original, War Repository. 


18530. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. February 28, 1812, 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia that his contingent is organized so as not to be 
manageable in the war. This division into the vanguard, army corps and reserve, is not the right 
one. Tell him that he must form his army corps into two divisions of infantry and a brigade of 
cavalry: 

Ist division, nine battalions of infantry, one regiment of hussars and eighteen pieces of 
artillery, besides the artillery of the regiments; 

2nd division, nine battalions of infantry, one regiment of hussars and eighteen pieces of 
artillery; 

The Ist Cavalry Brigade will be composed of two regiments of cuirassiers, light lancers 
of the guard, bodyguards and two artillery batteries on horseback of 12 pieces. 

The train and the administrations must, as well as the military crews, be divided between 
the three divisions. Consequently, there will be four infantry brigades, two of which are four 
battalions and two of five battalions. 

By this means he will have a corps of army very simple and easy to handle. If the troops 
which he has at Danzig join him, the divisions would be of eleven battalions each; which would 
not prevent, in the circumstances, to reunite the two regiments of hussars with the other 
regiments of cavalry, and to form a fine division of 2,500 horses, and to make such an infantry 
battalion as one would like” 


259 


Page 260 


in the vanguard, But my intention is that the permanent organization be in two divisions and a 
reserve of cavalry. It is good that this reserve of cavalry should be commanded by a general of 
brigade. 

Point out to the King of Westphalia that the cavalry regiments are very feeble at 550 
men; they should each be 8 or 900 horses, and the regiment of lancers of the guard, because 
before the enemy it would be reduced to nothing, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18531. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 29, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I thought it appropriate to assemble in the 10th Military Division a 
reserve division composed of infantry, cavalry and artillery, which would put once for all my 
frontiers safe from the incursions of brigands. 

My intention is to entrust this command to General Travot. You will order him to leave 
within twenty-four hours after receiving your letter to go to Toulouse; he will get along with 
General L'Huillier, who commands the 11th Military Division, so that at the slightest event the 
columns of the Bayonne reserve will set in motion and make their way to Tarbes. 

When he has recognized the frontier, he will place his troops in the manner he deems 
most convenient; he will even build some defensive towers at the most important points of the 
passes, if necessary. Of course, he will not place his troops on the French territory, but on the 
back of the mountains and so as to be master of the pendant of the waters. Finally he must not 
forget that his only goal must be to defend the border. 

General Avice will command his cavalry. You will appoint an artillery colonel to 
command his artillery. You will also give him two engineer officers with a pioneering company 
and tools. 

General Gareau, who is at Mont-Louis, will be under his command. General 
Wouillemont will command his right at Saint-Girons. General Brouard will be ordered to go to 
General Travot to command his advance guard at the outlets of Ax and L'Hospitalet. 

General Travot will first carry his headquarters to Toulouse,” 


260 


Page 261 


and as soon as his arrangements are made and his troops sufficiently organized, he will go to 
Foix; he will then go to Tarbes and Mont-Louis; he will himself visit all his posts and take such 
measures as I no longer hear about the outrages made on the French territory by brigands. 

The troops under General Travot's orders will be: 

1st Two companies of artillery of line, with twelve pieces of mountain gun, which will 
be harnessed by what there is artillery train in the 10th military division; 

2nd The 4th and Sth battalions of the 116th; 

3rd The regiment which is at present part of the Bayonne reserve, which is commanded 
by the Major in the second Vallet, and which is composed of men of the 17th and 31st light and 
the 86th of the line; at which regiment you will send the order to go to Tarbes, where he will 
receive the subsequent orders of the commanding general; 

4th The 2nd Battalion of the 3rd Regiment of the Grand Duchy of Berg, to be completed 
by 840 men by the Ist Battalion; immediately after this operation, the cadre of the Ist battalion 
will return fully to the Grand Duchy of Berg, and the 2nd battalion thus completed will go to 
Tarbes; 

5th The Ist and 2nd battalions of the 29th of the line, to be completed by 800 men, for 
which purpose all the detachments will be recalled, all that is available in the 5th battalion will 
be the first two battalions, all that would be embarked will be disembarked, and this regiment 
will start without delay from Toulon to Toulouse with its artillery, its equipment and its teams; 

6th The cadre of the Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 5th battalions of the 2nd regiment of the 
Mediterranean; all the refractory conscripts who would be in these battalions will be placed in 
the 4th, which alone will remain in the islands of Hyeres; These four battalions will march to 
Toulouse with their colonel, their majors, their labor masters, and the depot; the minister of the 
administration of war will decide whether they will have to carry off some of the clothing they 
would have in their stores; Arrived at Toulouse, these cadres will receive 3,500 conscripts from 
the first ban of the National Guard of the 10th Military Division; 

7. Finally the battalion of Wurzburg and the other troops which are at Mont-Louis; which 
will make 8 to 9,000 men of infantry. 

The cavalry will be composed of a provisional brigade, which will be commanded by 
General Avice. He will have under him: 

1st A provisional regiment of hussars, which will consist of 120 horses of the 4th 
hussars, 120 of the Ist, 120 of the 3rd, 50 of the 2nd and 70th of the*”’ 


261 


Page 262 


10th; total of the regiment of march, 480, forming four companies; this regiment will be 
commanded by a second-in-command, whom you will appoint without delay; as soon as half of 
these men are on horseback, they will leave their depot to go to Foix; 

2nd A provisional regiment of chasseurs, composed of 100 men of the 29th chasseurs, 
100 men of the 15th, 200 of the 13th, 100 of the 22nd; total 500 men or five companies; as soon 
as half of them have gone up, they will go to Tarbes or Foix; this regiment will be commanded 
by a second-in-command; 

3rd Finally a regiment of dragoons, which will also be commanded by a major in second 
and which will be composed of 30 horses of the 16" of dragons, 30 of the 21st, 30 of the 26th, 30 
of the 27th, 80 of the 25th, 80 of the 24th; total, 280 horses. 

This provisional brigade will thus be 1,260 cavalry men. 

Infantry forces may be increased, if necessary, by the cohorts of the National Guard of 
the 9th and 11th Divisions, as well as by some new battalions from the Bayonne Reserve, as 
soon as the conscription has furnished new means to the corps that are in the military division 
Island. 

Always give orders for departure of the four battalions of the Mediterranean; before they 
arrived in Toulouse, the arrangements I made for the first ban of the National Guard will be 
known to you. 

National guards who are trained and those organized under the name of Chasseurs des 
montagnes will always be kept. 

There must be at the Repository information as to what is to be done to rectify this 
frontier; have them search. My intention is that the whole of the water and the good positions are 
ours, and that we build ovens on the passes where it will be necessary. You will propose to me a 
decree of meeting to the frontier departments of all the pendants of the waters. 

You will recommend to General Travot not to place the men of the Grand Duchy of Berg 
in the front line. They are good troops who fight well, but do not scatter the outposts to not 
expose them to the temptation to desert. He can hold them in hand at Castres or at Foix, and they 
will give well in the execution. 

Do not instruct General Decaen of all these preparations, but reiterate the orders to 
maneuver so as to alarm Vich or Ripoll the enemy on Berga, and to arrange for this operation 
with General Reille, to whom I give order to provide line column?” 





262 


Page 263 


to surround Urgel. This siege looks at General Decaen, the place invested once and for all, it will 
be in communication by Puicerda and Mont-Louis with all my troops of the frontier. 

Write to the Minister of War Administration that horses and saddles should be procured 
without delay, by all means possible, from the regiments I have just indicated to you, which must 
supply the cavalry of the reserve, so that the depots can raise their quotas. Appoint junior majors 
second to command the provisional regiments, and charge them to go through the different 
depots, so that the detachments are more quickly put in a position to rejoin. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18532. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 29, 1812 


Cousin, I see with pleasure that the million of powder to be shipped from Wesel to 
Magdeburg and the 500 thousand to be sent from Mainz are gone; Prussia has offered me a 
million. So this important point is. 

I believe that the dispatch of the 43 guns, 18,000 balls of 20, 11,000 of 18 and 1,725 7- 
inch bombs, etc., which were to be sent from Wesel, must be suspended. I approve what the 
general of artillery proposes to me, to modify the armament of the places so that the pieces of 12 
replace those of 18, and that one is not obliged to carry this large quantity of balls. Finally, I 
approve that we use the 76,000 shells of 7 inches, 7 lines, 27,000 6-inch shells, and lines which 
are at Magdeburg, by sending pieces which are at Metz. Finally, when these modifications are 
made, if anything becomes necessary, Prussia would furnish it. Write in this direction to the 
artillery general and the minister of war, so that nothing is sent from the French forts for the 
arming of the Oder and Vistula squares, unless it is a few carriages and objects of little 
importance. It is necessary, however, that the first inspector take measures so that the places are 
in a good state of armament. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War.” 





263 


Page 264 


18533. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, February 29, 1812. 


Count Decres, you will receive a decree by which, without changing the present 
regiments of the marine artillery, I have ordered that the 1st regiment should supply the ports of 
Brest, Rochefort, and Lorient; the 2nd, at the port of Toulon; the 3rd, at the port of Cherbourg, 
and the 4th, at Antwerp. The Ist regiment will have the headquarters of a battalion at Lorient and 
that of another battalion at Rochefort. By this means, there will be artillery staffs in all major 
ports. I left the Ist regiment (that of Brest) to four battalions, that of Toulon to five battalions, 
and the 3rd and the 4th regiment each to two battalions. I left them the current composition; only 
the formation of the company will henceforth be as follows: the officers, according to the present 
organization; | sergeant major, 6 sergeants, 1 quartermaster, 12 corporals, 40 Ist class gunners, 
40 2nd class gunners, 148 cannon-gunners, 2 drummers; total, 254 men; which makes more than 
1,500 men per battalion, and for thirteen battalions about 20,000 men. The number of men 
currently composing these battalions being 10,000 men, so you are short of 9 to 10,000 to arrive 
at the complete new organization. Now, by my decree, I took 6,000 on the maritime conscription 
of 1813; which, out of 9,000 conscripts of the navy, leaves you 3,000 to recruit the crews as 
sailors. I also grant you 2,000 men on the conscription of land, which is currently in motion. 
These 2,000 men are supplied by the levy of 14 men on the contingent of each regiment. It is 
essential that, in the day of tomorrow, you make the distribution between the ports of Toulon, 
Brest, Antwerp and Cherbourg, so that the director general of the conscription can give in time to 
the prefects the order of take these 14 conscripts from each contingent on the march. These 2,000 
men will all have arrived in the various ports before the 15th of March, because the director- 
general will preferentially appoint Provencals for the Toulon regiment, Bretons and Poitevins for 
that of Brest, & c. It will be essential, therefore, that you give the order to the staff and depot of 
the 4th Regiment to proceed to Antwerp without delay, and to those of the 3rd to proceed to 
Cherbourg. Some officers will even have to go there, because the conscripts will arrive before 
the deposit, and it takes some officers” 


264 


Page 265 


to receive them. You can even order to land some in Antwerp and Cherbourg to receive the 
conscripts provisionally. With these provisions, you can return to Cherbourg, Antwerp, Brest and 
Toulon, in the course of April, all garrison companies that you have there. 

I saw only disadvantages in changing the current organization, and that new 
embarrassments for accounting. Nothing can prevent the men of the Toulon regiment, once 
embarked, from being found in the harbor of Brest, and those of Brest not found in the harbor of 
Toulon; this is therefore without remedy. The main thing is that there is a staff and an artillery 
depot in each major port. The bad air of Amsterdam and the dearness of everything in this 
country prevented me from placing a deposit there. When we have enough ships to have Spezia, 
we can demand that a staff resides in La Spezia. So you have no new officer to ask; you only 
have to appoint a few sergeants and corporals. By this means all these perpetual discussions with 
the war will be over. In the event of an extraordinary sortie, it will always be possible to resort to 
the extraordinary means of placing some fine company of grenadiers or voltigeurs aboard the 
vessel commander; but the usual service will be able to do without the help of the two ministries. 
This will be a great benefit for the service; it will also be a great economy, because you will have 
one less officer on board. Only one officer can command the garrison and the gunners. You will 
have a more marinated garrison and more skillful in the service of the cannon, and finally the 
colonel or the chief of battalion who will remain in the depot will be there more useful. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18534. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITAIE, AT MILAN. 
Paris. February 29, 1812. 


My son, I received your two: situation reports on February 15th. 

I can hardly see in the state of the situation of the 4th Corps of the Grand Army that the 
regiments have left very feeble, since none is in full of 840 effective men in the battalion, and 
that the 84th, the 92nd, the 9th in line, the 35th, etc., do not have their battalions above 630 men. 
It would therefore be about 600 men that each regiment would miss; which, for the six French 
regiments, forms a deficit of nearly 4,000 men. It is important?” 


265 


Page 266 


to remedy this inconvenience and to assemble at Verona a column formed of detachments drawn 
from the 5th battalions and men of the hospitals. I see that the 92nd has 400 men at his 5th 
battalion, that the 84th has 230 men, etc .; All this, no doubt, will not be able to supply the 5 or 
600 men that are lacking in every regiment, but at least it will be able to supply it. I gave you 
notice that the battalion of the 62nd had to arrive in Italy, that the 5th battalions of the 6th line 
and the 14th light and strong detachments of the regiment of the Mediterranean had to leave the 
island of Elba and Corsica to come to Verona; all this must be a reinforcement of 14 to 1500 
men: has this happened? The 4th battalion of the gm light, who goes to Illyria, has he passed? 
how many men he had when he passed through Mantua? Nine companies of the 5th battalions of 
the 18th, and the 18th light, and the 23rd of the line, are, a long time ago, gone from the islands 
of Sainte-Marguerite to Laybach: have these companies passed? The 8th and 18th light should be 
in full force. I hope that all this will be able to train the 3 to 4,000 men you miss and that you 
will leave Verona for the army at the end of March. 

You had the greatest fault of letting the incomplete Italian regiments go. Like the French 
regiments, they are all weak and have only 5 to 600 men per battalion. However, they have a lot 
of people at their 5th battalions; you could even take it from the other battalions remaining in 
Italy. So do this operation, and complete the nearly 2,000 men who are missing from the Italian 
regiments, by uniting them at Verona. These detachments will thus form a marching division of 
6,000 infantrymen. 

All artillery companies on foot must be 120 strong men on their way to Trento. They 
lack, however, many men: the 9th company of the 2nd regiment of foot artillery has only 112 
men; the 7th company has only 111 men; the 5th, the 12th have only 109 men; the 8th, the 10th, 
the 20th companies have only 110 men, and even 76. Have them supplied by the depot of the 2nd 
Artillery Regiment on foot, which remains in Italy, and by the men leaving the hospitals, which 
is necessary to carry the companies of this regiment to 120 men each. 

I make the same observation for the Italian artillery companies. The horse artillery 
companies must be 100 men; however, the 2nd Company of the 4th Regiment has only 82 men; 
the 3rd company, 80 men; the 6th company, 81 men; the 4th and 5th companies have only 84 and 
86 men. There are enough horses, but there are not enough men. Take in? 


Page 267 


the depot of the 4th regiment what is necessary, and direct it on Verona to complete to 100 men 
each of these companies. I make the same observation for the Italian horse artillery company. 

I make the same observation for the sapper companies; they must be 150 men, they are 
less than 120 men: complete them. 

As for the cavalry, all the regiments of French light cavalry have to their little depots 
must go to Verona, as men heal, to rejoin their regiment. As for the two Italian regiments, I told 
you that I found them very weak. It is necessary that you draw from the other regiments of 
chasseurs the number of men necessary to carry the squadrons to 250 men, including officers. 
You will form a marching squadron of these detachments: you will have the men armed and 
dressed, and you will send them on foot to Augsburg, where you will make markets for their 
bidding horses. April these regiments have 1,000 men on horseback effective, that is to say 900 
men in front of the enemy. I call completely the French regiment by the depots of Besancon, 
since the 4 squadrons will join them. Les 4e squadrons of the regiments from the division of the 
dragoons will also join in. Order that all the men available at the small depots of the regiments 
go to Verona. It is my intention that the regiment of the Queen's Dragoons will leave with 600 
horses and 1,000 men will stop at Augsburg, where they will be mounted. The first three 
squadrons will continue their journey to join the guard, as I have sent you by a letter of 
yesterday, so that the guard will consist of 300 even the guards of honor, 450 men of the 
dragoons, and 1,000 men of the Beine regiment; which will make 1,700 men on horseback; I will 
join a German Allied regiment, which will make a beautiful reserve division of more than 2,500 
horses in the guard. 

Military crews. The 13th Division must have only one company of military crews; the 
14th division must have the 2nd company; the 15th must have an Italian crew company; the royal 
guard must also have an Italian company; the light cavalry division must not have military crews, 
nor the reserve division of dragoons. These two divisions must have only their forges and their 
ambulances. There will therefore remain four French military crews, four companies of the 
Italian battalion, and the six companies of the Italian oxen crew battalion;””” 


267 


Page 268 


which will make fourteen companies destined for the park of your army corps. In the condition 
you sent me, I do not see any reference to ambulances, corps caissons, or ambulances. 

You are wrong in carrying in this state the Kellermann division as composed of the 10th, 
11th, 12th and 13th brigades. The 3rd Light Cavalry Division, commanded by General 
Kellermann, should be composed only of the 10th and 11th Brigades. The 12th and 13th brigades 
do not belong to any division; they form light cavalry brigades attached to your army corps. 
Have this correction made to avoid any misunderstanding and that, if Kellermann's division were 
to leave you, you did not intend to let go with it four brigades, but only two. 

I do not see in your state all the pontoon companies which must follow your army corps; 
I think there are five or six. Nor do I see the strength of the companies of the battalion of Italian 
military crews who have left. Pass the review of this battalion, so that what is at the depot, and 
could not leave, leave for the meeting, at the marching column of Verona. 

So I suppose that at the end of March 5 or 6,000 infantrymen, a thousand unmounted men 
of cavalry, the detachment of sappers, the train of French and Italian military crews who have not 
left, which will make a force of 7 to 8,000 men under the command of a good brigadier general, 
may leave to join the army. 

At the end of April, another convoy will have to leave. I had 2 to 300 conscripts of Italian 
France put into each depot of the French regiments which are in Italy; which will make 15 to 
1600 men who would receive these deposits. The first arrivals, and in the case of leaving at the 
end of April, will leave to recruit the 4th corps. It would be necessary for each battalion to supply 
200 men, which, together with the men who had left the hospitals, would form a column of .... to 
.... Men, to whom we would give a good commander, and who would start functioning 
accordingly, orders that I would give. Independently of these detachments, 500 French conscripts 
are destined for each of the 5th battalions of the French regiments; these 500 conscripts will 
remain in Italy for the guard of the peninsula. Give your instructions to General Vignolle so that 
he understands this mechanism. 

It will be necessary to load on the boxes that will leave with the column that will move in 
the month of March the effects of clothing and linen and shoes that deposits will have*®* 


268 


Page 269 


to send to the corps. With the column that will leave in April will also leave the effects that the 
deposits would have to send. 

So you must dispose of everything for Verona's marching column, except for the queen's 
regiment of dragons, which you must set in motion without delay. 

Complete your seafarers' company with 120 men, and be good sailors. You have a 
gunsmith company in Brescia; it would be necessary to form a company of 120 men gunsmiths 
and send it to join the army corps. Why is the 5th Company of the 2nd Miners' Battalion brought 
to Verona? This company had to leave, to be part of the Great Army, as a result of even corps. It 
seems to me that in Italy you have many more companies of sappers, miners and pontooners that 
you must not keep. A company of Italian sappers in addition to the army would be very useful, 
and it can not be of any use in Italy. 

I await a state of affairs, arrested on March Ist, of the 4th Corps of the Grand Army, 
more detailed and more exact than the one you sent me. 

I will tell you about the situation of the forces that must remain in Italy for its defense and 
the maintenance of tranquility. There remain eighty-fourth Italian battalions, four French 
battalions of the thirteenth regiment, which makes twelve battalions; there remain ten 5th Italian 
battalions and seven 5th French battalions, which makes seventeen battalions; independently of 
two battalions of Italian veterans for Mantouo, two battalions of the sedentary regiment of 
Venice, the 4th Battalion of the 4th Italian Light in Venice, the 3rd and 4th Battalions of the 5th 
Regiment of Italian Line at Venice, and the 4th battalion of the Dalmatian regiment, which is at 
Venice, and the 4th battalion of the 2nd Italian battalion, and the 4th battalion of the Ist of the 
Italian league, which are in the canton of Tseiu; which forms six 4th battalions which, joined to 
the four battalions of the 13th of the French line, make ten battalions. All must be completed in 
men, which will form a division of about ten thousand infantry, which will be divided into three 
brigades, one of which will be at Udine, one at Verona, and the other at Padua, with eight or ten 
regimental pieces. The cavalry that will be attached to this division will be indicated below. This 
division will be able to go to Venice, to Palmanova, to Illyria; if it should march on Illyria, the 
movement will be by the brigade of Udine; if it is necessary to march on the Isonzo, it will be 
done by the brigade of Verona; if it is necessary to march on Ancona, by the brigade of Padua.*” 


269 


Page 270 


The important places to keep are: 1st Palmanova, where two French or Italian artillery 
companies are to be held, three 5th battalions forming 2,000 Italian or French men, so that there 
is in this place, to make it the ordinary service, 2,000 garrison men; I ruled on armaments and 
supplies; 2nd Osoppo, where you need 2,000 men and an artillery company; I have provided for 
everything concerning armaments and supplies; 3rd Venice; the sedentary regiment of Venice, 
with two battalions, three French and Italian battalions, the naval battalions, the French and 
Italian artillery, will form a force of 3,000 men; 4th Mantua, where the two battalions of Italian 
veterans, three 5th battalions and four Italian artillery companies are needed; 5th Peschiera, 
where a 5th battalion and an artillery company are needed; 6th Legnago, who needs such a 
garrison. 

By this means all the north of Italy will be guarded, and besides, a reserve of 8 or 10,000 
men will be able to maneuver between the squares. 

Ancona: Four 5th battalions are needed; three or four French or Italian artillery 
companies, with the coast-guard gunners, will make 2,500 men. 

A reserve division for the defense of Lower Italy will be formed of two Italian battalions, 
which will remain at Ancona; four French battalions from the reserve of Rome, which will be 
placed on two steps of Ancona to be within reach I to assist this place if it were threatened; two 
battalions of the 112th, which will be placed at Bologna with an artillery company, which will be 
two or three steps from Ancona, and within reach to march to the aid of this place. 

This 2nd division will be composed of nine battalions. Twelve pieces of artillery will be 
attached to that Division, and will be given 4 or 500 horses, as will be said below. 

Thus two active divisions, forming nineteen battalions, will be charged with the 
maintenance of the police in Italy, within reach of Venice and Ancona, and being able, according 
to circumstances, to march on Livorno, Genoa or Home. 

Cavalry. The 3rd Italian Fighter Regiment has its 9th Company to be completed with 250 
men and 150 horses. This company, with that of the 1st regiment of Italian chasseurs and that of 
the 2nd of chasseurs also completed with 150 men, will form a provisional regiment of 600 
horses. The 4th Squadron of the Regiment?” 


270 


Page 271 


Napoleon's Dragoons, the 9th Company of the Queen's Regiment of the Queen's Dragons, will 
form a provisional regiment of dragoons to be brought to 600 men or 150 per company; finally 
the 4th regiment of chasseurs will complete these four squadrons with 800 horses. We shall thus 
have a provisional regiment of chasseurs, 600, a provisional regiment of dragoons, 600, and the 
Ath regiment of chasseurs, 800, forming more than 2,000 horses, which will be attached to the 
two active divisions. All French battalions will be in full force in April. It is necessary that at that 
time all the Italian battalions are also in full force. Two battalion executives are coming from the 
Spanish army: they will have to be completed to have this additional force. 

Independently of the artillery of the regiments, it is necessary to have enough to harness a 
dozen country pieces with a simple supply, so that these divisions can be worn on all the points 
of Italy. 

Give also the organization; all states must be made in order, and you must complete the 
Ath battalions as soldiers and officers, and all this may be of good service. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18535. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March Ist, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I refer you to the route of the Helder. I do not see what use the citadel 
might be; it is an expense which will give no property in the place, Fort Morland, Fort Lasalle, 
the precinct of the place, all these works have only one goal, it is to cover the batteries which 
defend the harbor. Once these batteries are taken, what does it matter to a citadel that does not 
defend the entrance to the harbor, since it would be 1,200 toises? The citadel we would like to 
put on the side of Fort Dugonunier, we must put it at the entrance of the Nieuwe-Diep. It must be 
a stone citadel, vaulted, with casemates, making me perfectly master of the dike, protecting the 
batteries and armed with thirty to forty pieces of cannon, so that the enemy, having seized Fort 
Morland, the fort Lasalle, of Fort Dugommier, of the enclosure, has still nothing as long as he 
will not be master of the citadel, The forty guns will prevent his squadron from entering the 
roadstead, and from then on my ships will be7”’ 


271 


Page 272 


always safe. This citadel, which can easily have a resistance of fifteen to twenty days, can thus 
give fifteen or twenty days more to arrive and save the squadron. I can have twenty warships 
there; consider the immense advantage of having this property more. 

In general, the enclosure of the place seems to me very great. I would prefer it 100 
fathoms behind, so that there were only four fronts on the front, and on the side of the harbor 
three fronts at most; that would make the place better defended, would require less garrison and 
could be much better looked after. 

The unsafe of the place must be taken into consideration; It is difficult to have a large 
garrison, and it is difficult for a large garrison to maintain it for a long time. 

The obligation to defend the forts Morland, Lasalle, the Lock and Dugommier, already 
comprises 3,000 garrison men. 

A place that is dressed is expensive, and the economy of a few fronts is important. In a 
place not covered, there is also an advantage in saving a few fronts; this makes the guard easier 
and better protected from surprises. Instead of six fronts I would like, if possible, only four on 
the front. 

What I especially want is at the citadel or reduced to the entrance of the Nieuwe-Diep. 
There is between the place where the navy wants to build its basin and the Nieuwe-Diep 250 
toises; when one took him a hundred yards to the fort, there would still be enough left. It would 
be a matter of principle, as long as the fort is there, that the navy will not build anything between 
the fort and its basin and the sea, so that the citadel could play all its game on the basin and on 
the ships, and was not dominated by the buildings. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy, Depot of War. 


18536. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS, 
Paris, March Ist, 1812. 


My Cousin, Prussia must supply me with 12 to 15,000 horses; I think it would be proper 
to set up depots to receive them. There must be a very honest general officer who is in charge of 
receiving the horses and who does not accept any bad ones: This general officer would remain in 
Berlin, except then establish the deposit on the Oder or in places where forage would be more 
abundant, 





272 


Page 273 


He would have two majors or colonels under his command, one in charge of the Berlin depot, 
that is to say the deposit between the Elbe and the Oder, and the other with the deposit between 
the Oder and the Vistula. Search where the cavalry depots had been established in the campaigns 
of 1806 and 1807. A third deposit on the Vistula would be necessary. The general whom you 
propose to me to organize these deposits must deserve all confidence. Prussia will also supply 
horses for artillery and military crews. It is therefore necessary that the artillery and the crews 
have in these depots officers to receive their horses. As for the horses to be bought in the Duchy 
of Warsaw, I believe that 1,000 will suffice. I want 250 Portuguese to go, well armed and well 
equipped, with their saddles, in the Grand Duchy, where they will be reassembled, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18537. - NOTE TO COUNT DAHU, 
MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE, PARIS. 
Paris, March Ist, 1812. 


The Emperor, often needing to consult the note of what Prussia must supply to the Grand 
Army, wishes Count Daru to send him to his cabinet. 
According to the copy Comm. by Count Daru. 


18538. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, March 2, 1812. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I think it is necessary to send the mail today to Lauriston. Do not 
talk to him about Czernitchef's espionage, which you are not supposed to know yet. Explain to 
Lauriston that in no case should he make a commitment to an interview; that I will see with 
pleasure a negotiation when my troops are on the Oder and the Vistula; that I do not want an 
interview; that it is a means which he can use, but that he must always allow me the master to 
evade it. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives.””° 





273. 


Page 274. 


18539. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris, March 2, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano, by the letter you send to St. Petersburg, you will write, in Berlin, 
to the Comte de Saint-Marsan that, as soon as the treaty is ratified, he asks for a good 
commander, with a sufficient garrison at Memel, where they are armed and supplied with this 
place to put it in a condition to keep a few days, so that in any event this place is not 
compromised and the Russians can not seize it. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18540. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IN PARIS, 
Paris, March 3rd, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano, write to my minister at Baden, asking him to ask that the artillery 
of the Baden contingent should have its double supply, that is to say, four hundred shots to be 
fired per piece; that the troops should carry for twenty days food with them, and that the 
regiment of cavalry be increased to 1,000 horses, that is to say, to four squadrons of 250 men 
each, and each company to 125 men. The Grand Duchy of Baden is rich enough to make this 
increase to his contingent. I need it and I want it. 

You will write by hand to my minister at Darmstadt that I wish the cavalry regiment of 
the Hesse-Darmstadt contingent to be increased to 1,000 horses, but that I recognize that this 
country has done more than it should and could not, and that, therefore, I require nothing from 
him; that I ask that he raise the men and organize them, and that he buy the horses, and that I will 
pay the whole thing; that thus the Grand Duke of Hesse-Darmstadt will have 500 men of cavalry, 
including officers, at his expense, and that the 500 others will be at my expense, Have a treaty 
made in this direction. I will regularly make the necessary funds to pay these expenses; that will 
make a fine regiment for Prince Emile. You will ask that there be twenty days of provisions 
carried on cartons following the contingent. 

Ask the Prince of Nassau if he could raise a regiment of 1,000 mounted chasseurs, 
organized like those of Baden and°”* 


274 


Page 275 


from Hesse- Darmstadt. I will deal with him, and I will pay the first bet as well as the interview. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18541. - TO PRINCE KOURAKINE, 
AMBASSADOR OF THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA, IN PARIS (1), 
Paris, March 3, 1812, 


Mr. Ambassador, I have placed under His Majesty's eyes the letters you have done me 
the honor to write to me concerning M. Jean Custinguer (2). 

His Majesty was painfully affected by the conduct of Count Czernitchef; he saw with 
astonishment that a man whom she had always treated well, who was in Paris, not as a political 
agent, but as an aide-de-camp to the Emperor of Russia, accredited by a letter to the Emperor, 
having a character of confidence even more intimate than that of an ambassador, took advantage 
of this character to abuse the most sacred of men. 

His Majesty flatters himself that the Emperor Alexander will be as painfully affected as 
himself to recognize, in the conduct of M. de Czernitchef, the role of an agent of corruption, 
equally condemned by the law of nations and by the laws of honor. 

H.M. the Emperor complains that, under a title that called trust, spies were placed near 
him and in times of peace, which is permitted only with respect to an enemy and in times of war; 
he complains that spies have been chosen, not in the last class of society, but among the men 
whom their position also attaches to the sovereign. 

I know too much, Ambassador, the sentiments of honor which have distinguished you 
throughout a long career to believe that you are personally afflicted with something so contrary 
to the dignity of the sovereigns. "If Prince Kurakin," said the Emperor, "could have entered such 
maneuvers, 





1) This letter, signed by the Duke of Bassano, Minister of Foreign Relations, was dictated by the Emperor. 

2) Custinguer, the concierge of the Russian legation, had been the intermediary with which M. de 
Czernitchef had used himself to gain an officer of the offices of the war, and thus obtain information on the 
preparations ordered by the Emperor for the purpose of a next campaign against Russia,” 


275 


Page 276 


the would excuse; but it is not the same with a colonel clothed with the confidence of his master 
and attached so closely to his person." 

His Majesty had just given the Count of Czernitchef a great proof of confidence by 
consulting him for a long time and directly; she was far from thinking that she was only talking 
with a spy and a corrupt agent. 

I am specially charged to make a complaint to Your Excellency; His Majesty has no 
doubt that the Emperor Alexander does justice to such a lapse of respect, procedure, and the laws 
of honor. 

According to the minute, Archives of Foreign Affairs. 


18542. - TO THE COUNT BIGOT DE PREAMENEU, 
MINISTER OF RELIGIONS, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 3, 1812. 


Count Bigot de Préameneu, it is time to end this scandal of the Sisters of Charity in revolt 
against their superiors. My intention is to suppress houses which, twenty-four hours after the 
warning you give them, would not have entered subordination. You will replace the suppressed 
houses, not by sisters of the same Order, but by another Order of Charity. The Sisters of Charity 
of Paris will lose their influence; it will be good. You will substitute for them sisters of an Order 
of which one is the happiest and who has not given subjects of complaint. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Baroness de Nougaréde de Fayet. 


18548. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 3, 1812, 


Count Decres, send me the copy of the letter I signed for Captain Barre and the 
instructions you gave to this officer. 

An unforgivable improvidence has been placed in the Rivoli exit. The English vessel was 
so near that, if my instructions had been executed, we would have been informed of his 
presence. I await your report and the information that clarifies this unfortunate event. 

However give order to go down to Malamocco the Reqeneratore, the Mont-Saint- 
Bernard, the Castiglione and the Princesse de*"® 





276 


Page 277 


Bologna, and to threaten to bring out these ships to force the English to strengthen their cruises 
in the Adriatic. Complete the crews of these ships. Order that we build a new pair of camels, so 
that we can cross the pass with two ships at a time. When there are four or five ships there, I will 
send a division of ships to take them under his escort. The presence of the ships at Malamocco 
will force the English to hold two or perhaps three ships. It will be sufficient to send, when it is 
time, four or five vessels. 

The capture of the Rivoli must not prevent justice to the engineers and the men of the art 
who so skilfully executed the operation of the exit of this vessel. Give me a report on this 
operation, so that I blame some and reward others. 

Regardless of the Princess-of-Bologne, it would be good to have one or two other 
frigates in Venice. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess Decrés, 


18544. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 3, 1812, 


My Cousin, the Polish Army Corps will form the 5" Corps of the Grand Army. The Ist 
Division will carry No. 16; 2nd Division, No. 17; and the 3rd division, No. 18. This corps will be 
commanded by Prince Poniatowski. 

The 6th Corps of the Grand Army will be composed of Bavarians. The 1st division will 
carry the number 19, and the 2nd division the number 20. This corps will be commanded by the 
general Saint-Cyr. 

The 7th corps will be formed by the Saxons, the Ist division will carry the No. 21, and 
the 2nd division will carry the No. 22. 

The 8th corps will be formed by the Westphalians. The Ist Division will be No. 23, and 
the 2nd Division will be No. 24. 

The Wurtemberg corps will form only one division, which will carry No. 25. 

The division composed of the brigades of Berg, Hesse-Darmstadt and Baden, which 
General Daendels commands, will form only one division and will carry No. 26. 

From April Ist, the denominations of Corps of observation of the Elbe, of 2nd Corps of 
the Elbe, of the Corps of the Ocean, will be suppressed, the Corps of observation of the Elbe will 
take the name of 1st Corps eit 





277 


Page 278 


of the Grande Armée; it is composed of the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, Sth and 7th divisions, and will be 
commanded by the Prince of Eckmihl. The 2nd Corps of the Elbe will take the name of 2nd 
Corps of the Grand Army; it will be composed of the 6th, 8th and 9th divisions, and will be 
commanded by the Duke of Reggio. The observation corps of the Ocean will take the name of 
the 3rd corps of the Grand Army; it will be composed of the 10th, 11th, 12th and 25th divisions, 
and will be commanded by the Duke of Elchingen. 

The 4th Corps of the Grand Army will be composed of the 13th, 14th and 15th Divisions. 

You will order the 25th Division, composed of the Wurtembergers, to stay in Coburg, 
and leave, after a stay, for Gera, where she will receive new orders. At Gera, this division will be 
ordered to be part of the 3rd corps. It is necessary that she not be aware of this disposition until 
she arrives at Gera. It is also necessary that she receive the order of departure only on March 20, 
to leave on the 21st. 

Order General Tharreau to go to Cassel to take command of one of the divisions of the 
Westphalian corps. 

Write to the King of Westphalia that I sent him General Vandamme; that I send him 
General Tharreau to command one of his divisions; that General Chabert, having served only as 
a major, has not the necessary aptitude; that I choose a brigadier general capable of being his 
chief of staff; that he should send his baggage and his military house to Halle, and that he should 
come from his person, with very few people, to Paris. He will come incognito; there will only 
remain two or three days; after which he will rejoin his army corps. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18545. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 3rd, 1812. 


Cousin, repeat the orders to the Prince of Eckmiihl so that as soon as the brigades of 
Hesse-Darmstadt and Baden arrive at Magdeburg he will immediately send them to Pomerania, 
in order to clear Magdeburg, which is all whole for the Duke of Reggio's corps. The Duke of 
Reggio has not informed you of the situation of the division of cuirassiers, nor when it will be 
reunited in Magdeburg. Instruct the Prince of Eckmihl that the Bruyére division,’”® 





278 


Page 279 


which must be placed forward, on the right bank of the Oder, must communicate with the 
brigade Pajol, who is at Danzig, and with the cavalry of Grand Duchy, so that the ordinances can 
always be communicated. Warn him that it is possible that I order him to leave from the 15th to 
the 20th to take a position on the Vistula with his entire army corps and to be returned on the Ist 
of April; that, however, I have not yet decided upon this movement; but that it is none the less 
necessary that all its divisions should be so arranged that in two days they can pass the Oder; 
that I suppose that General Dessaix, with the part of his division which is at Stettin, will be 
returned to Kustrin and occupied Landsberg; that I am waiting to decide his movement to know 
the day when General Damascus, with the brigade of Berg, the brigade of Hesse, the brigade of 
Baden, will arrive in Pomerania, Stettin, and Kiistrin; that, however, if the Russian army does 
not move, it is possible that I delay on my side in order to win a better season; that the Hessian 
brigade, arriving on the 6th at Magdeburg, must have arrived before the 15th in Pomerania. 

Write to the Minister of War of the King of Saxony, having your letter delivered by my 
minister at Dresden, that I have ordered the Prince of Eckmithl to carry with his Ist division on 
the Oder, to send detachments his cavalry on the right bank and to communicate with Danzig 
and the troops of the Grand Duchy; that I sent General Reynier to command the Saxon corps 
which I suppose assembled at Guben; that Prince Poniatowski will command three divisions of 
the Grand Duchy, forming a corps d'armee; that it is my intention that the King give orders to 
the commanders of the Saxon corps and the Grand Duchy to be under the orders of the Prince of 
Eckmiihl, who is at Stettin, to correspond daily with him, to send him exactly their Maps of 
situation and to be constantly ready to execute his orders; that my principal intention is that the 
Grand Duchy should not be ravaged, and that, if the Russians begin hostilities, the Prince of 
Eckmiihl should be able to go with sufficient speed to protect the territory; that Prince 
Poniatowski must correspond by orders with the vanguard of Prince Eckmiihl. 

You will inform Prince Eckmiihl of the letter you have written to the Minister of War of 
the King of Saxony. You will inform him that General Reynier commands the Saxon contingent; 
that I have already sent him to load flour and biscuit with the buildings at Kiislrin; that I 
suppose, too, that all he will find in?” 


279 


Page 280 


Stettin, he will have it loaded on wagons of the country, to ensure his provisions and to have no 
worries about the Vistula. He must renew the orders for Danzig to convert a large quantity of 
wheat into flour. At last you will inform the Prince of Eckmiihl that I ordered the Bavarians to 
leave on the 10th to go to Glogau. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18546. - NOTE, 
Paris. March 3, 1812. 


Count Daru and the Minister of the Interior will call upon them the architect Fontaine and 
two other architects to examine the following questions. 

The Imperial Archives are very badly placed. This year it is proposed an expenditure of 
300,000 francs. It is to be feared that they are burning; but they lock it up, as it were, into the 
archives of Europe. The Emperor's project was to put them in the Louvre. 

1st question. - Can we put in the Louvre the Imperial Library and the Archives? 

2nd question, - The second floor of Luxembourg is empty. Make accommodations in a 
palace is unsuitable; Senate officers who are not there for life would be poorly housed there; 
hence the idea of putting the library of St. Genevieve there; this would offer the advantage of 
making the location of this library free for the high school. 

But the Archives are of an entirely different importance. 

Is it advisable to put only the Imperial Library at the Louvre, with the manuscripts, the 
medals, the furniture, and all the precious things? If there was room, which would prevent, for 
example, to put in the Louvre models of artillery? All this adorns a palace and is appropriately 
placed there. 

If it were important to place the Archives in Luxembourg immediately, or the Sainte- 
Genevieve library, is there enough room for the Archives? Will they be safe? If we put the 
Archives in the Louvre, could we start this year? 

We will report to the Emperor on this object in the week (1). 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 





1) A decree of March 12, 1812, ordered the construction, on the left bank of the Seine, between the punished of 
Lena and Concorde, of a building intended to receive the archives of the Empire. The work, begun shortly thereafter, 
was abandoned in 1814.78° 


Page 281 


18547. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. March 3, 1812. 


My Son, I learned about the Rivoli disaster. You did not, in this circumstance, justify 
what I expected from you. I asked you, first, to be of your own at Venice, at the moment of the 
departure of the vessel; Secondly, to await the return of the couriers you were to send to Pola, 
and the reports of a cloud of avisos, which would have taught you with certainty whether the 
Adriatic was free; 3rd, to bring out with the Rivoli, the Princess of Bologna or another frigate. 
You have not done anything of it. If only a frigate had gone out with the ship, you would have 
been victorious. If you had sent letters to Pola and notices everywhere, you would have known 
that there was an English vessel in the Adriatic. Re-read the letters I have written to you, and you 
will see that I can only attribute the Rivoli catch to the care you have taken in carrying out the 
instructions I gave. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A, L Mm, the Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18548. - To EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN, 
Paris. March 3, 1812. 


My Son, we made great mistakes by letting Rivoli go out without a frigate and without 
lighting up the seas. It is not necessary, however, that the loss be discouraged, Do not bring out 
the Begeneratore, but hold it to Malamocco, Have it descend the Mont-Saint-Bernard, and, as 
soon as possible, the Castiglione and the Princesse-de Bologna, Have a second pair of camels 
built, so that two vessels can be brought out at once, When the moment is favorable, I will send a 
division of ships, which will make me master of the Adriatic for the time that the ships will come 
out to go to Ancona. Meanwhile, the English will be forced to hold several ships in the Adriatic, 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18549. - NOTE FOR THE MINISTIRE OF WAR 
ON A PROJECT OF ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL GUARD. 
Paris. March 6, 1812, 


This decree seems to me, as well as all states.7°! 


281 


Page 282 


I do not want legions; the last rank will be battalion commander. You need a title of 
administration; this one is not developed enough. All the cohorts will meet at the chief town of 
the division, where they will be dressed and equipped by the board of directors, which will have 
at its disposal all the depot, an officer of clothing, a quarter-master, tailors, shoemakers and a 
number of workers; all this counting in the deposit. 

The prefect is chairman of the board of directors; the sub-prefect of the chief town is 
specially charged with the details. The board of directors is composed of the prefect, the sub- 
prefect, the director of the division, the quartermaster, the captain of the clothing and two 
captains taken from the depot. 

Specify that the mass of the clothing is paid to the deposit, that of linen and shoe to the 
cohort. 

Each cohort will have a board of directors that will correspond with the board of directors 
of the department. 

The reserves will be centralized. 

The Minister of War Administration will pay the board of directors what is his first bet 
and ruin of clothing, whereby the board of directors will provide for everything. 

In the decree, it is not enough to feel that the National Guard must be for the defense of 
odds. 

I think we have to go back to the proposed decree, or change it as follows: 5th division, 
instead of three cohorts, four; 10th division, instead of two cohorts, four; 11th division, instead 
of two cohorts, three; 20th division, instead of one cohort, two; total, thirteen, instead of eight; 
which will make thirteen cohorts, which will be destined for the defense of the Pyrenees; a 
cohort for the coasts of the 9th division; one for Bordeaux; put one fault for the other ribs, there 
will always be ten cohorts. The four cohorts of the 10th Division will all be formed by the cadres 
of the four battalions of the Mediterranean regiment, Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 5th Battalion, arriving at 
Toulouse. 

In the decree, it might be useful, without commitment to anything, to indicate the place 
where cohorts should meet. 

1st and 2nd military division, to form a reserve in Paris, eight cohorts; 3rd, one; 4th, one; 
5th, two, to keep Kehl and the places of the Rhine; 6th, for Paris, three; 7th and 8th, for Toulon, 
six; 9th, 10th, 11th, 20th, for the Pyrenees, thirteen; 12th, for La Rochelle, three; 13th, for Brest, 
six; 14th and 15th, for Cherbourg, six; 16th, for’? 





282 


Page 283 


Bruges, seven; 16th, 18th, 19th, for Paris, four; 21st, for Pontivy, three; 22nd, for Amboise, four; 
24th, for the Scheldt, five; 25th, for Wesel, three; 26th, for Mainz, three (1). 

It should be said in the report that it is the creation of a new army of the interior. 

In the decree of organization, it should be stated that officers and non-commissioned 
officers may be taken from among those who are retired or who have served, who are in the 
departments, and that they will accumulate their salary with their retirement, and that for 
soldiers, corporals, sergeants, lieutenants and second lieutenants, but not for captains, who may 
accumulate a portion. 

The Tuscan cohort would be formed by one of the cadres of the regiment of the 
Mediterranean, which is garrisoned on the island of Elba; those of Rome and Genoa, likewise. 
Piedmont could provide four frames. 

Put that senators will be sent to the military divisions to organize the cadres, and that, in 
each department, a council chaired by the prefect and composed of the sub-prefect of the dear 
place, the official gendarmerie, the officer superior commanding the department, the 
commissioner of war or authorizing officer, the inspector of journals, will designate the officers, 
non-commissioned officers and pensioner soldiers capable of entering these frames, by 
designating them to the senator, who will hold a council composed of the general division, the 
inspector of magazines, the prefect, the authorizing officer, to designate those who will compose 
the cadres; they will call them to the chief town and make sure they have the required qualities. 

Non-commissioned officers and soldiers who have served in the National Guard, or who, 
without having pensions, have already served, may be admitted. 

The senator will train the cadres on the spot and will address the state to the Minister of 
War, who, after having communicated the minutes of the council, will approve the NCOs and 
submit for our approval the officers with the states of service and the age of the individuals. 

As soon as this decree is drawn up, General Dumas will present it to the Council. 

It must be well understood in my decree that this is the year from the inside; that, no 
doubt, conscription is sufficient, but that she will be called to the army next year; whereas, in the 
circumstances, it is proper to have an army from within, 





1) To postpone this distribution. , (Vote of the minute.)"*? 





Page 284 


which, in two years time, will be better than the army of the line; so that we have no anxiety for 
our establishments of Texel, Toulon, Alexandria, and for the safety of the places which are the 
boulevard of the Empire; that this creation puts France forever safe from all anxiety; that, had it 
existed, we would not have seen what happened in the Scheldt and the Pyrenees. 

What could have happened by particular events ... .. (1) will no longer take place for my 
empire ... .. (2) 80,000 men aging five to six years under the flag, having the security of not 
leaving France ..... (3) 

This army will not come out of the interior, because the conscription of this year, 
educated, will remain to recruit the losses of the campaign, and so on. 

I do not approve the recital of the decree; we must suppose a recent senatus-consulte. 

The senatus-consulte will be preceded by a report from the Minister of Foreign Affairs on 
the present system of the influence of the Empire and a report by the Minister of War. 

It is not the battalions that are lacking in France; but it is shameful that an elite army is 
exclusively assigned to the interior. 

It will be pointed out that only battalion chiefs are to be appointed, because the staff must 
be the staff of the army. 

If Legion chiefs with six cohorts had been appointed, they would have been chiefs with a 
special spirit, instead of cohorts united in pairs or four under the command of a major or a 
colonel and by six or eight, under a brigadier general, form a regular system and use the staffs of 
the divisions. 

Practice and economics also advise this measure. 


SENATUS-CONSULTE. 


ARTICLE: 1st. The National Guard is divided into first ban, second ban and back ban. 

2. The first ban is composed of all the conscripts of the last six classes. 

3. The second ban brings together citizens up to forty years old. 

4. Backbench, all French up to sixty years old. 

5. The National Guard, the first ban, the second ban, or the rear-ban, may not, under any 
pretext whatsoever, leave the territory of the Empire; it is intended only for border guard, 





1) and 2) [legible words. 
3) Unfinished sentence on the minute.”** 





284 


Page 285 


the internal police and the conservation of large munitions depots, arsenals and fortified places. 

6. No part of the first ban of the National Guard may be discharged except by a senatus- 
consulte, in the opinion of the ministers (1). 

7. The first ban of the National Guard for 1812 will be formed by the different 
departments, according to the attached table. 

8. One hundred cohorts will be placed at the disposal of the Minister of War; each cohort 
has eight companies, six of which are active, one is artillery and one is depot. The guards will be 
taken among the men of such and such class. Until the organization of the Second and Third 
Bands, nothing has been done to the existing laws on the organization and removal of the 
National Guard (2). 

Tomorrow at the Council of State; Monday in the Senate; Tuesday at the State Council 
for the report. 

The senatus-consulte, Thursday. 

Signed by His Majesty Friday (3). 

The Minister of War may send an extract to the prefects of the Pyrenean departments; he 
will prepare his work to start there. 

The Secretary of State will introduce to me five senators: General Hedouville, for the 
four cohorts beyond the Alps; General Rampon, for those of the Pyrenees, 9th, 10th and 11th 
Division; General Latour-Maubourg, 13th, 14th and 15th Division; Sainte-Suzanne, 5th and 26th 
division. 

Dam must put order that we will not depend on the Minister of War, and that the money 
be put on the spot at the disposal of the boards of directors. 

Dam will base these provisions on what I must have said, on some similar occasions, that 
as long as we have the war with England we must remain armed; that the French people must 
consider themselves in extraordinary circumstances as long as peace with England is not 
restored. 

In the form of clothing, talk about new models. Each cohort will have a pennant, which 
will be given by the boards of directors, when they are reunited in brigades. 

The Emperor will give the eagle for the brigade. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 





1) "On the advice of the Minister of War. (Note of the minute.) 
2) These various provisions are reproduced in the senatus-consulte of March 14, 1812, but with notable 
modifications; see the Moniteur of March 16, 1812. 


3) The senatus-consulte was signed by the Emperor only on Saturday 14th.” 





285 


Page 286 


18550. - NOTE DICTED IN THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS. 
Paris, March 6, 1812, 


The basins of Antwerp and Flushing are sufficient for the Scheldt Navy. It is a harbor that 
is to have. 

At Terneuse, a channel similar to that of Nieuwe-Diep, at Terneuse, in the canal of the 
Ecluse, or in the Sas-de-Ghent canal, is required. 

A replacement sketch of Fort Nieuwe-Diep will be sent to the Minister of War, who will 
order the Director of Engineering to travel to the site and present a project for this fort. It must be 
at least 900 toises from the end of the bench. 

The Director of Engineering will sound the line with the utmost accuracy. He will consult 
with Admiral Ver Huell to mark the number of vessels that can anchor in this harbor and the 
points where they can approach the fort. 

It had been settled in the engineers' councils that two large batteries would be made to 
protect the work of the fort. This year we will work on these two batteries, placing mortars and 
pieces of 36; and, while waiting for the fort to be finished, which can only be the next campaign, 
a camp will be pitched there; which will enable the admiral to get his frigates out and to keep 
them in the harbor. 

According to the copy. Naval Archives. 


18551. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 6, 1812. 


Cousin, I send you the letters of Prince Eckmiihl. Tell him that he must place his army 
corps in the following way, as of March 15: 

General Bruyere, with his light cavalry, at a march in front of Stargard, cutting the three 
directions of Kolberg, Danzig, and Bromberg. This general will have his artillery and his 
headquarters a day's journey closer to the Vistula than Stargard, so that this division, with its 
light artillery, may in six or seven days be reunited on the Vistula. 

The 2nd Cavalry Brigade of the Ist Corps will carry its headquarters to Landsberg. She 
will be under the command of Major General Dessaix. She will have positions on the Bromberg 
and Posen directions.”*° 





286 


Page 287 


General Dessaix will have his artillery, his administrations, and all his division united at Kiistrin. 
The regiment he has at Glogau will join him at Posen, when the division receives the order to 
march. 

The corps headquarters, with an infantry division, will be at Stettin. 

The other two divisions will be on the left bank of the Oder, well quartered, so that a 
division may in one day reach Stettin, and pass the next day the river; I will arrive in Stettin the 
second day. Gudin's division will be at Stargard on the right bank. The park will be placed one or 
two steps from Stettin so as to arrive there on the second day and cross the river. 

The cuirassiers will be placed so that in one day they can pass the Oder, to support the 
division Bruyere. 

A battalion of Hesse-Darmstadt and a battalion of Baden must be returned as soon as 
possible to Kiistrin, to form the bottom of the garrison of this place. 

Another battalion of Baden and another battalion of Hesse-Darmstadt must be placed at a 
march from Stettin, so that when the division at Stettin receives the order to march forward, these 
battalions may proceed to Stettin to form the garrison. 

The whole of Berg's brigade must be in Swedish Pomerania, as well as the rest of the 
brigades of Hesse-Darmstadt and Baden. A battalion may be detached to guard the coast of 
Mecklenburg. 

The Mecklenburg contingent must march with the last division of the corps. It will be 
useful to the corps for many services. 

The prince of Eckmiihl will order Prince Poniatowski to assemble a brigade of light 
cavalry of 2,000 men, to put it under the command of a good Polish general, and to place it on 
the side of Thorn. This brigade will be part of the Bruyére division, which, from March 20, will 
send him orders. This brigade of Polish cavalry will not move, however, from Thorn or the 
environs, so as not to give any anxiety. 

Prince Poniatowski, without making any extraordinary movements, must bring Warsaw's 
Polish troops to Posen and Kalisz closer to Warsaw, so that his corps may, in the event of an 
event, find itself all together on the Vistula. He must even bring things closer to Thorn. These 
movements will be made by the left bank. Thorn will be guarded by the 5th Polish Regiment, 
which Delones to the 7th Division, and by the Light Cavalry Brigade of which I have spoken 
above. By 





287 


Page 288 


in the meantime, Prince Poniatowski will have advanced on the Vistula all his army corps. He 
must have, on the Ist of April, 1,500,000 rations of flour and 500,000 rations of biscuit at 
Modlin. 

The Saxons must be ready to pass the Oder twenty-four hours after they have received 
the order. They must have for March 25, on wagon, flour and biscuit for the whole Saxon corps 
for twenty days, so that they can make their movement without being stopped by any 
consideration. 

Before March 20, the Ist Army Corps will make no movement; By this time, Prince 
Eckmithl will have received my orders. He must be able to leave on the 20th of March, if he 
receives the order, his carts laden with biscuit and flour, each soldier having his cartouches of 
war and his stones with fire. There must be enough food in the stores of Stettin for the corps to 
take, by the way, for eight days. It is necessary, independently, for the army corps to have on 
carts and after it biscuit, but especially for flour, oxen, for twenty days. The corps must, if it 
receives no orders, be able to remain motionless for fifteen or twenty days more. 

As for the Prussians, I signed a treaty of alliance with them. The Schwedt bridge must be 
lifted. The prince of Eckmithl will signify to them that, being on a foot of observation, no 
military movement must take place in his lines; that their troops must remain where they are and 
not move until they have agreed on the movement they must make. Count Saint-Marsan, as soon 
as the treaty is ratified, will be able to inform the different Prussian corps of the places they must 
occupy. 

It is very important that the cuirassiers have their carabiners, that they burn a few 
cartridges and that they learn the charge. 

Recommend to Prince Eckmiihl not to take anything belonging to the 2nd corps. He must 
bring six sapper companies, one for each of his divisions and one for his park. He must send the 
battalion of sailors with his tools to Danzig, and ensure his march so that this precious battalion 
runs no danger; this battalion is useful to Danzig to work on the constructions. 

You will tell the Prince of Eckmiihl that, when he receives the order, he may arrive in 
twelve days, and if it is necessary in ten days, on the Vistula, by walking by the three wheels. I 
wish him to make known to you by an extraordinary courier the weather which he makes 
between the Oder and the Vistula, if there is much snow,-*° 


288 


Page 289 


if I thaw started or when it is believed that it will begin. He must ask General Rapp what is the 
situation of the forage on the island of Nogat, without, however, doing anything to alarm. Ask 
Prince Eckmiihl if the Kiistrin Canal in the Vistula is frozen and when it can be used. 

We must prepare for Danzig four or five armed boats, to make us completely masters of 
the Hall. Finally, order Prince Eckmihl to have one of the two flotilla crews of the 32nd Military 
Division come to Stettin, so that he may have with him a thousand sailors, who will be very 
useful for the passage of the rivers, and for transportation. There must be no movement in 
Danzig to avoid alarming. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18552. - TO COUNT HEDOUVILLE, SENATOR, PARIS. 
Paris. March 6, 1812. 


Count Hedouville, we wish you to go without delay to your Senate, to visit the 
departments of Rome and Trasimeno. 

Your mission; like that of the senators in their senate, must be all of observation; During 
your stay you will be surrounded by public officials and the most important people in the 
country. Their communications with you will have the effect of spreading the true spirit of the 
Government and sending to your knowledge the observations, both on men and things, of which 
it would be important for the good of our service that we were informed. 

We authorize you to write to us directly from all the chief towns where you go, to 
communicate to us your observations and the information which you have collected. 

You will, however, make a general report, which you will give us upon your return, and 
which will include not only a report on the situation of the country, but also the observations 
which you think you will have to present to us, as regards the present public officials and the 
men worthy of being called to public office, only on those parts of the administration which 
might be in arrears and which would require or encouragement or modifications. 

We have the right, Count Hedouville, to count”’? 


289 


Page 290 


on your zeal, when we want to receive from you information useful to the interests of the State 
and the well-being of our peoples. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the minute. Empire Archives, 


18553. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 7th, 1812. 


Count de Cessac, I authorize you to make the second order of 1,150 horses for the 
Spanish army. It is important that the 4,800 horses that must form the depot of the Spanish army 
exist in the course of April, in order to recruit the armies of Spain, to have a good number of men 
on the borders of Spain, and to be able to place a platoon of cavalry at all the outlets of the 
valleys, and finally to have, for the service of the coasts and the interior, the value of 2,400 men 
ready to go where the need would require it. 

Prussia must supply me with 15,000 horses, of which 6,000 are light cavalry, 3,000 are 
heavy cavalry, 6,000 are artillery or crew, quarter by quarter, from month to month. I therefore 
agree that you bear the 1,700 horses whose orders are not made in France on the supplies of 
Prussia; consequently, they will spend the Berlin depot. As for the 6,000 artillery horses or 
military crews, my intention is that we take it to assign to battalions for which the purchase of 
horses is not yet ordered, but whose frames are made and men provided by conscription. We 
should have the wings made in Berlin; the men would march with the harnesses, as soon as they 
were armed, dressed and equipped, they would find wagons and horses in Berlin; that would 
make a considerable saving. 

Thus it will be necessary to give me a statement, Ist orders made in Germany at the 
Hanover depot, 2nd orders made inside, 3rd orders made at the Potsdam depot. The depot of 
Berlin and that of Posen will be under the orders of a particular officer; they will return to the 
accounts of General Bourcier, when his present mission will be over and allow him to go there. 
Dilute all the saddles, because I see that there are 5,000 men in Hanover and that there will soon 
be 5,000 horses that can not be used if we have enough to equip them. I also ordered the 
purchase of 3,000 horses in the Duchy of Warsaw, and ordered?” 


290 


Page 291 


that 250 men of Portuguese chasseurs would be sent there; but these horses are intended to 
replace the losses resulting from the war. It is necessary to indicate well in the state the place 
where each regiment must take its horses, in order to direct the men. As for the carts of the 
military crews, the major general will let you know that my intention is that the departure of the 
battalions be accelerated, and that in the absence of wagons of the new model we take the old 
one, because the essential thing is that the battalions leave; otherwise they will not arrive in time 
to be useful in the first operations. 

The crews of the 6th and 7th battalions are late; the wagons of the new model will not be 
useless for that; they will be sent by means of horses that will be procured by rent markets, and 
they will leave, those which are in Italy, of Verona, and those which are in France, of Mainz. 
They will serve to effect effects which, by this means, will not be discharged, and when the 
wagons have joined the army, they will be employed according to the circumstances. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18554. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
DIRECTOR MINISTER OF ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, PARIS. 
Paris, March 7th, 1812. 


Count de Cessac, I am responding to your letter of March Ist. I am pleased to see that the 
3rd and 4th companies of the 2nd Battalion of the Military Crews have left on the 4th of March 
from Wesel, in charge of clothing effects; that the 5th and 6th companies leave Mainz, loaded 
with effects of clothing or ambulance; that the 10th Battalion is marching on Mainz. It is useless 
to give the company line of caissons of the new model, if it has caissons of the old model: it is 
necessary to maintain the uniformity. I see that the 4th, 5th and 6th companies of the 6th 
battalion will have received one hundred and twenty caissons; but I can hardly see that the thirty- 
seven cars that should have been gone for a month are not yet. I insist on the execution of my 
orders for the detachments of the Ist, 2nd and 3rd companies, the time presses me; it is the same 
for the 7th battalion. As I see that Sampigny has four hundred and sixty caissons of the old 
model, my intention is that the making of wagons does not delay the departure of the battalions; 
once again, I am pressed for time.””! 


291 


Page 292. 


As the new caissons are completed, they will have to be directed to Mainz. 

That the director of the hospitals... leaves for Mainz the day tomorrow, that he 
should load the effects of ambulance on the first caissons and that he goes to the 
headquarters, which is already in Erfurt, that he will have to be hard to join. 

The half-battalion which you organize in Paris will not be able to leave until April Ist; it 
will serve that reason; but I may not be able to count on him anymore. 

I find myself in a situation of fear of having no ambulance for the first cases, which are 
still very bloody. The hospital authorizing officer shall stay at Mainz for a maximum of two days 
to initiate the most necessary effects; He will proceed to Erfurt, where he must have arrived on 
the 20th. The intendant general will also be there at this time. As soon as they arrive, they will be 
ordered to go to Berlin and successively to the Vistula. The big effects of hospitals that would 
not have left for headquarters, that is to say, the general store of this service, could be carried by 
the battalion you organize. 

Ask the Intendant General and the Authorizing Officers of the various services that there 
is not a moment to lose and that everyone must be at his post. 

All that will not be on the 20th in Erfurt will not join anymore. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18555. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
DIRECTOR MINISTER OF ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, PARIS. 
Paris. March 7, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I reply to your letter on the operation of brandy: it seems 
to me ill-calculated and will not succeed; it seems to me that we must give up this operation. Do 
not buy anything anymore; that everything that is bought be transported to Magdeburg, and that 
these transports be made by markets such as the entrepreneurs, be responsible for the quantity 
and quality of the brandies. As for that of Paris, you can give it to the trade, or, if you have it 
transported to Magdeburg, it is important that it be with the same precautions. It seems easy to 
check if the brandy has been altered. But, if this transport is done otherwise, the precautions are 
an immense detail and can not” 


292 


Page 293 


to have a result. I will have spent 2 or 3 million and I will have nothing. So I think we have to 
reduce that by the simplest possible way. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the orisinal, Deposition of the suerre. 


18556. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 7th, 1812. 


Cousin, I receive your letter of March 5th on the different detachments of the military 
crews who arrive on the Rhine, You will put before me the states of motion indicating the day 
when the 2nd and 3rd companies of the 2nd battalion of the military crews will arrive at 
Magdeburg, as well as what they charged at Wesel, My intention is that the general store be 
established at Magdeburg, that these effects are not unloaded, but only that one checks the 
loadings, that one repairs the cases, barrels or bales, and let them continue their journey on 
Danzig. 

The Ist, 2nd and 3rd companies of the 6th Battalion will arrive at Mainz on March 20th. 
If the minister of the administration of war has the effects of clothing to load into it, he will profit 
by it; failing which, they will be charged with ambulance effects and, failing these, with spirits, 
so that on the 23rd, for any delay, they will march for Magdeburg. 

Order that the thirty-nine old-model caissons that leave from Sampigny for Wesel 
continue their journey to Hanover, where they are necessary to complete the 4th, 5th and 6th 
companies of the 6th battalion, formed by Marshal Duke of Reggio. 

The detachments of the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and Sth companies of the 10th battalion, which 
take caissons at Strasbourg, will have to deal with them in clothing; in the absence of effects of 
clothing, of effects of ambulance; in the absence of ambulance effects, they will take charge of 
brandy and, if there are no brandies, tools. They will cross the Rhine no later than the 22nd, and 
will go to the headquarters. 

The Ist, 3rd, and 6th companies of the 10th Battalion, which will arrive at Mainz on the 
20th, will leave on the 22nd. The 2nd, 4th, and 5th, which will arrive on the 21st, will leave on 
the 23rd and will proceed to the headquarters. They will take care of effects of clothing 
belonging to the administration of the war, effects belonging to the corps of effects of 
ambulance, brandies, rifles, taking care to put a very -lightweight””’ 





Page 294 


loading, and to take the last of these objects only in default of the first ones. 

I do not know what it is that eighteen caissons of the 12th battalion that the minister 
wants to leave Strasbourg for Wesel. A movement of Strasbourg on Wesel, when the corps on 
which they are moving is at Stettin, is a false movement which doubles the distance. Instruct the 
minister that no movement should be done except by my order. These eighteen caissons of the 
12th battalion must not leave without my order. It is necessary to make them buy horses, to give 
them carters taken in a depot, to make them pass the Rhine and to load them in Strasbourg. It 
will be a good reinforcement that will receive the 12th battalion. I see that the sixth would have 
sixty cars, and the seventh two hundred; as soon as they have their conscripts they will have to 
set out; but it is necessary that the twenty wagons which the 6th battalion is to take at Sampigny 
should go to Metz, so that they may leave without delay for Mainz. The 7th Battalion must take 
its wagons at Antwerp, Strasbourg, Auxonne, Douai and Delft. 

The minister must not expect that my intention is for the horses to take the cars; that 
would delay the arrival of this corps too much for the army. My intention is that he take the 
twenty wagons that are in Mainz, the twenty that are in Strasbourg, which will form him a 
company. The first available horses will depart from Metz for Strasbourg for this purpose; the 
hundred wagons of Antwerp, the twenty of Douai, and the twenty of Delft, must be sent to Mainz 
by military transports, and if, when the battalion is ready to leave, these wagons have not arrived, 
it is my intention that take boxes of the old model in Sampigny. The caissons of the new model 
will follow later, and when they arrive at the army, they will be used. 

My intention is that, under no pretext, the battalions have no delay, because the army is 
on the march. As soon as the horses and the men are ready, they must leave with caissons of 
Sampigny, charged or not. The main thing is to have caissons of the new or the old model. 
Express my intention to the Minister of War Administration so that it does not happen too late. 

The caissons of the new model that will arrive by the military transports will always find 
their use. As soon as the 100 horses of the 9th Battalion have arrived at Placentia, the caissons 
will eu As soon as the twenty cars of the one at Versailles are ready, let them go; military 
crews 


294 


Page 295 


are very late. The 12th Battalion, the 2nd and 9th are only able; the 6th, the 7th and the 10th are 
still a long way off. I would be very sorry if all these battalions could not leave in the course of 
March, so that they could join before the Ist of June. I suppose the three companies of the 6th 
battalion that are forming at Hanover will arrive in time. 

I would like the Major Inspector of the train to give you a clear report on the other 
battalions I have organized, namely: the one at Comtoise No. 14, which must be organized with 
conscripts from Danzig and Poles. Are managers appointed and left? did one or more officers 
leave? were orders given for the construction of cars and the purchase of horses? The horses can 
be taken on those of Prussia; the King of Saxony holds the men ready to send them on the first 
request of General Rapp. The 20th battalion of oxen must be formed at Danzig; the oxen must be 
supplied by Prussia at Danzig. The trolleys must already be built. Are the cadres gone? For men, 
General Rapp will take Danzig; the supplement will be provided by the Poles. I commissioned 
the King of Saxony to organize a battalion at Comtoise at my expense. I desire, however, that the 
commander and two officers be sent there to direct the formation of this battalion, the Inspector 
of Journals, to be sent to Warsaw to review the men of the Army of the Duchy who are in my 
pay, will provide the necessary advances for the organization of this battalion of crews. The men 
will be Polish; the battalion will carry No. 16. Do the battalions at Comtise No. 15 and 17 have 
their appointed cadres? Have we ordered the sails, harness and horses? When will they be 
available? Time is the big element of everything. The inspector must make sure of the facts; it is 
money thrown out if I lose several months, because it would be necessary to make the same 
expenses to make up for it in other ways. The Major Inspector will also take positive information 
on the battalions of oxen. You will advise him to carefully check the information that will be 
given to him in the offices, and to make a detailed report on which I can rely on all this. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.””° 


295 


Page 296 


18557. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 8, 1812. 


My Cousin, renew the order to General Reille to go to Berga and the French Cerdagne to 
dislodge the insurgents. It is only too true that they feed on France, and that they are quartered at 
Puycerda, whence they do not move. Reiterate the order to send an Italian division to Navarre. 
He will hold the Ist Italian division in Aragon and will keep with him the French division. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18558. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM. 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 8, 1812. 


Cousin, I have informed you that I gave the command of the Polish division, composed 
of the regiments of the Vistula, to General Claparede; but this general did not know him this 
morning. Where does this negligence come from? I have also seen that wily Adjutant- 
Commander Lagrange: how did he not go to visit the Prince of Wurtemberg? My orders are 
running slowly. Make it leave in the day of tomorrow. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18559. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM. 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 8, 1812. 


My Cousin, I receive the contribution of General la Riboisiére. Give him the most urgent 
orders. My intention is that on the 12th of March all that belongs to the crews of the bridge will 
start from Wesel, Mainz and Strasbourg, going to Magdeburg, so that on the Ist of April I have 
in this place, if not all bridge crew horses, at least all that it will be possible to have. Make it 
clear that all horses that will not have crossed the Rhine by the 10th of March will not arrive in 
time for my projects. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.’”° 





296 


Page 297 


18560. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 8, 1812. 


Cousin, you told me that the battalion of the Pupils which is at Evreux was dressed and 
armed: it has neither clothes nor bags and is in the worst condition. Let me know when this 
battalion will be armed and dressed, and report to me on its situation, battalion by battalion. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria. 


18561.-TO THE COUNT COLLIN DE SUSSY, 
MINISTER OF MANUFACTURING AND TRADE, IN PARIS, 
Paris, March 10, 1812 


Monsieur le Comte de Sussy, by my decree of December 25 last, I granted a million for 
the service of the subsistence in the different cities. Of this sum, 290,000 francs were allocated 
for the premiums given to Paris bakers; so there is still 710,000 francs available. As we are in the 
most unfortunate time of the year, it is fitting that you present me with a project for the 
distribution of this remnant of funds, 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18562, - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS, 
Paris, March 10, 1812. 


Count Decres, I refer you your report on the exit of the Rivoli. As I reread my letters and 
instructions, I do not know how it is possible that this event happened. I wish to deepen this 
affair. 

Write to the Viceroy to find out whether the letter of which is attached has been delivered 
by him to Captain Barre, and if, in charging Admiral Villaret to replace that captain in Venice, he 
has also been given a copy of your letters and instructions. In this case, this admiral would have 
shown very little prudence. If the viceroy had not communicated these letters and instructions to 
Admiral Villaret, he would be guilty. Write to him on an honest but firm letter. 1° It was my 
intention that the ship should not go out until it was there: was it there? 2nd I ordered that the 
ship was accompanied by frigates and?’ 


297 


Page 298 


corvettes. 3rd A large number of boats were to light the sea, and in this case all the fishing boats 
are advised. In your letter to the Viceroy, relate to him the positive terms of the letters which 
have been written to him, and ask him how, having foreseen all the circumstances, it happens 
that one did not obey my orders. As I like to reward and show my satisfaction when we do well, 
I also want to express my dissatisfaction when we hurt. If Admiral Villaret has received the 
instructions of the vice-ruler, I will blame him. Your letter must be reasoned. Attach a copy of 
my letter and instructions, so that he is well convinced of his wrong; that will at least have some 
advantage for the future; it will put less lightness in the reading of orders. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Duchess Decres, 


18563, - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
DIRECTOR MINISTER OF ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, PARIS. 
Paris, March 10, 1812, 


Count de Cessac, I receive the situation of the hospitals on the Ist of February. I see there 
are 49,000 patients on the Ist of February, and only 42,000 on the Ist of January; which would 
make an increase of 7,000 patients during January. This first result frightened me at first; but, on 
closer examination, I see that the 32d division is carried for 6,400 patients on the Ist of February, 
and that it was carried for nil on the Ist of January; that Danzig is included for 1,500 patients in 
the state of February, and that it appeared for zero in the state of January: here is a difference of 
8,000 which comes from the manner of disposing the figures. Thus the number of patients was 
nearly the same in the two months of January and February; they decreased in Italy, in Ilyria, in 
the Ionian Islands; they increased by 100 men in the Sth military division; they decreased in the 
8th division, in the 10th and in the 11th division, although he passed many prisoners; they also 
decreased in the 12th, in the 16th division, in the 17th military division; finally they have 
diminished almost everywhere. Your result is not accurate; there were fewer sick in February 
than in January, despite the extraordinary movements of troops and the increase of 20,000 
Spanish prisoners who entered the country. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war,””® 


Page 299 


18564. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM. 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 10, 1812. 


Cousin, testify my discontent to the Duke d'Abrantes, because he was at Munich before 
his troops, and because he thus unmasked my movement two days earlier; which is why the 
Russian courier, who would not have left until March 2nd, left on February 29th. I want him not 
to go to Dresden and stay with his troops constantly, walking with his Ist division. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18565. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 10, 1812, 


My cousin, order that the 3rd division of the Guard, composed of the three regiments of 
the old Guard, leave Metz for Mainz, to know: the 3rd regiment of grenadiers, the 13th; the 2nd 
of chasseurs and the 2nd of grenadiers, the 14th or the 15th. These regiments will only stay one 
day in Metz. The ambulance division with its equipment, a company of sappers, a battery of 
artillery served by the gunners of the young Guard and two artillery batteries on foot, forming 
sixteen pieces of cannon, with sixteen caissons of infantry and their supply, will also leave Metz 
successively for Mainz. The three cavalry regiments from Paris will only stay in Metz and 
continue on their way to Mainz. All artillery in the Guards Reserve will work with grenadiers, 
hunters and dragons. Finally, the artillery park of the Guard, including the reserve of the Guard, 
as well as the park of the engineers, the bakers and the administrations, will also start on the 15th 
for Mainz. 

Order General Walther to go to Mainz to take command of the cavalry, and the light 
artillery attached to it. Send out a battalion of hunters, composed of 800 men, and a battalion of 
800 grenadiers, under the command of a major. You will choose the most tired men or that the 
trip in station would inconvenience more. The ambulances, the caissons of the two regiments of 
grenadiers and of the remaining chasseurs, the horses and luggage of the officers of the corps 
which must leave in station, and what remains from administrations, will leave with these two?” 





299 


Page 300 


battalions; so that only 1,600 men of all the old Guard remain, who can be posted on the Elbe, 
that is to say, in a fortnight. 

So my Guard will be composed in the following manner, to know; Ist division 
(Delaborde division); 5th regiments of tirailleurs and voltigeurs, four battalions; 6 regiments of 
skirmishers and voltigeurs, four battalions, regiments of skirmishers and voltigeurs, four 
battalions, total twelve battalions. 

2nd division; 1st regiments of skirmishers and voltigeurs, four battalions; fusiliers, four 
battalions; flankers, two battalions; total, ten battalions. 

3rd division (old Guard) Ist and 2nd regiment of chasseurs, four battalions; Ist, 2nd and 
3rd regiment of grenadiers, six battalions; total, ten battalions. 

The 2nd Division will be commanded by Major General Boguet; 3rd Division; or Old 
Guard Division, will be commanded by General Curial. You will introduce to me the warrant 
officers-general of the Guard who must be employed in these divisions. 

Cavalry; the five regiments forming 5,000 men. 

Artillery; the artillery is composed, 

1st Four regimental companies; an eight-piece company will be attached to the Delaborde 
division; an eight-piece company to the Roguet division; one of eight pieces to the chasseurs, and 
one of eight pieces to the grenadiers, forming sixteen pieces for the 3rd division. 

2nd There shall be attached to the division two artillery batteries, sixteen pieces of the 
reserve attached to the Guard; in the 2nd division, two artillery batteries of sixteen pieces from 
the reserve attached to the Guard; in the 3rd division, two batteries or sixteen pieces served by 
the Guard; to the cavalry, two horse batteries of the Guard. forming twelve pieces; at the reserve, 
walking with the park, two batteries of horse artillery of the Guard, twelve pieces; four horse- 
drawn artillery batteries of the line, twenty-four pieces; two batteries of 12 pieces of the line 
attached to the Guard, sixteen pieces; two batteries of 12 pieces of the Guard, sixteen pieces; two 
artillery batteries on foot of the Guard, sixteen pieces. The hundred and seventy-six pieces of the 
Guard will therefore be distributed as follows: to know; twenty-four pieces to the Ist this 
division; twenty-four pieces in the 2nd division; thirty-two pieces in the 3rd division; twelve 
pieces to the cavalry; eighty-four pieces to the reserve; total, one hundred and seventy-six pieces. 

Each piece of cannon will have to the divisions a full supply;°° 


300 


Page 301 


the double supply will be with the reserve at the park. Each division will have its sixteen 
caissons; the other caissons will be at the park. 

Engineering: Engineering consists of sapper companies. One of those in Metz must have 
been ordered to leave with the Ist division. A company will be attached to the 2nd division; a 
company will be attached to the 3rd division; a company will be attached to the park with 
pontooners, miners and workmen, as well as the company of the Grand Duchy of Berg, with its 
pontooners and with the sailors. 

It is necessary that the states of situation of the Guard are now presented to me in that 
form. It will bring what exists and what is missing. Each division will have its ambulances and 
the part of the administrations which it needs; the rest will remain in the park with the 
authorizing officer. 

Order the seafarers' company and all that can leave tomorrow. 

I approve the idea of training the grenadiers and the chasseurs a 9th company for the 
guard of Paris and to do the service with of the Empress and the King of Rome. Each of these 
two 9th companies will be composed of sickly men coming out of hospitals, or old and in need 
of rest. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria. 


18566. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERES, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 10, 1812. 


Cousin, it is necessary for the Guard to carry its flags. The chasseurs arm will have only 
one eagle; the grenadier's arm will have only one eagle, which will always be carried to the Ist 
regiment of old guard of each weapon; the mounted grenadiers will have only one eagle; the 
dragoons, only an eagle; chasseurs on horseback, an eagle; the regiments of light horse will have 
no eagle. 

Order the colonels to provide the pennant that each battalion must have. Voltigeurs will 
have red pennants and skirmishers white pennants; these pennants will carry nothing that 
indicates to which regiment they belong, nor that they belong to the Guard. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria.” 





301 


Page 302 


18567. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, MILAN. 
Paris. March 10, 1812. 


My Son, I receive your letter of March 4th. It is unfortunate that on a simple letter from 
Aldini you allowed to introduce colonial goods from Germany. A decree is needed to authorize 
such violations of the continental system. It is not by not preventing the circulation of these 
goods that you have done wrong, but it is by allowing their entry on a simple letter. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18568. - NOTE DICTATED IN THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS. 
Paris. March 11, 1812. 


His Majesty is made aware of the resource which the Rumford soups offer for the relief 
of the indigent class of the people. She notices that Rumford soups do not require wheat. The 
fact is that we lack wheat in France. The administration of the towns and the prefects should be 
ordered to have a large quantity of stoves built for the Rumford soups everywhere, not only to 
deliver gratuitously, but also to sell. It should first be established in the communes around Paris, 
especially Saint-Denis. The Ministers of the Interior and Manufactures will take care of the 
execution of these provisions. The Minister of the Interior will write to all the prefects to inform 
them that the Emperor has seen with discontent that in the countries where the bread is good and 
the food is scarce, they have not taken steps to establish Rumford soups by entrepreneurs who 
would sell them to the public. He will calculate that a soup costs so much and feeds like so much 
bread; Thus, in times of scarcity, this resource offers the people a way to feed themselves as if 
the bread cost only so much. He will send them instructions on how to build the stoves and how 
to make soups. 

We could then give them at half price. At Saint-Denis and in the neighborhood of Paris, it 
would be necessary that the prefect had the soups made by contractors and had them displayed. It 
would also be necessary for Paris to introduce the use of selling them, which should be 
absolutely separate from free distribution. Moreover, the worker who has a little ease may blush 
to go to charity, while he may find it convenient, especially for his children, to buy it cheaply. 
There is more advantage for the people to establish them for sale than for 


Page 303 


give free, because the free distribution can only be limited, instead that in countries where wheat 
is expensive it could take a big extension. 

The administration could, moreover, help by furnishing the furnaces and by ensuring that 
the soups were given at the best possible price. 

The Emperor adds to these observations the following questions: 

What is the manner of obtaining ten millions to meet the needs of the indigent class of 
France, which, for April, May, June, July and August, would make two millions a month? The 
resources seem to be the revenue of the communes. 

If there are funds from departments, either in non-securities or reserve companies, not 
only of the current year, but of all the backlogs, or finally savings that can be made on the 
budgets, in postponing less urgent expenses and granting something on the treasure, if it is 
necessary? 

Once funds are found, what is the way to use them, so that it is not a source of abuse 
more harmful than useful? These ten millions must be used to relieve the indigent class, to 
compensate it for the rise of the wheat. We must therefore know the departments where the price 
is the highest and who suffer, and finally determine what should be the distribution of these 
funds between departments, and the process to follow to reach the goal. 

We must walk in the direction which has been given to Paris; thirty thousand pounds of 
bread and forty thousand soups have been distributed to Rumford. It can be bragged today that 
no inhabitant of the capital suffers from hunger. 

Ministers of Interior and Manufactures, Minister of the Treasury, State Councilors 
Constituting the Council of Ministers and Ministers of State Regnaud and Defermon to Meet at 
Home Minister's Office with Minister of Police and the State Councilor General Manager of 
Municipal Accounts, to take care of this project. 

According to the copy. Empire Archives, 


18569 - TO THE COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 11, 1812. 


Count Mollien, we send a lot of money to Corfu; this has disadvantages. I would like you 
to send, on account of what you are passing through, 500,000 francs in*”’ 


303 


Page 304 


treasure payable, namely: 300,000 francs by the treasurer of Venice or Trieste and 200,000 
francs by the Treasury of France. You will order the payer that the 300,000 francs will be used to 
pay for the purchases made in Illyria (the Ilyrians will be well paid in Trieste), and the 200,000 
francs for those who wish to send their money to France. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien, 


18570. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTI, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 11, 1812, 


Duke de Feltre, my intention is to have six battalions of 840 men each, made up of 
Spanish prisoners, of good will, in accordance with the decree I have taken; which will make 
three regiments. 

The 3rd battalion of the Walcheren regiment is at Strasburg, and I have ordered by my 
decree that he would take 800 prisoners. The 4th battalion of Walcheren is on the island of Ré 
with 900 refractory conscripts. My intention is for this battalion to come to Paris; he will 
continue his route to Paris on the army, where he will be incorporated into the infantry of the 
line, and the cadre will return to Strasbourg to take Spanish prisoners. You will order the Major 
of the Walcheren Regiment to go to Strasbourg to preside over the formation and dress of these 
two battalions. 

It is necessary that the officers of the 4th battalion should not know that their soldiers 
should be incorporated into the army regiments, because they would be less zealous in arriving 
there intact. 

Order the cadre of the 3rd battalion of the Belle-Ile regiment, supplemented by officers 
and non-commissioned officers, to leave under the command of the major of the regiment and 
with the 4th battalion completed to 900 refractory conscripts, to go to Paris. The cadre of the 3rd 
battalion will double that of the 4th battalion until their arrival in Paris. You will remove from 
the 4th battalion all the malignant men, the bad subjects, and those who are not sure. 

Arrived in Paris, the 3rd Battalion's cadre will travel to Strasbourg to take Spaniards, and 
the 4th Battalion will join the Grande Armée. When he arrives, he will be incorporated into the 
light infantry, and the cadre will return to Strasbourg to take Spanish prisoners. 


304 


Page 305 


Order that the cadres of the 3rd and 4th battalions of the regiment of the island of Ré, 
under the command of the major, go to Strasbourg to receive Spaniards. 

Only the Ist, 2nd and 5th battalions will remain at Walcheren, Belle-Ile and island of Ré 
regiments. 

I will thus have in Strasbourg three regiments composed of Spaniards, commanded by the 
majors. 

The accounts will be related to those of the Walcheren, Belle-Ile and island of Ré 
regiments. 

Charge General Kindelan, whom I shall appoint inspector of the Spaniards, and to whom 
I shall give the rank of general of division, to go over the review of the depots of Spanish 
prisoners, and to choose the best subjects, by executing all that is prescribed by my decree. You 
will order that the men of these new battalions who desert, and that it would not be judged 
appropriate to shoot for example, be conducted to the island of Walcheren. 

The Spaniards who will be incorporated into the battalion of Belle-Ile will take the light 
infantry uniform assigned to this regiment. Those who will be incorporated into the regiments of 
Walcheren and the Isle of Re will wear the line infantry uniform of these regiments, except that, 
in each regiment, they will have blue cuffs and lapels with a yellow nock, so that they can easily 
be distinguished from any French arm. 

I will not oppose the fact that, when there is a vacations, we put in these battalions a few 
safe Spanish officers and NCOs. 

As a result of these provisions, my intention is to report the decree that creates the 
Regiment of Catalonia. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18571. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 11, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, reiterate the order to the majors of the Vistula regiments to admit only 
Poles and to reject all that is German and Russian; these regiments must have only Polish 
speaking men. 

Order the detachment of the 7th Polish Light Horse Regiment, which arrives at Saint- 
Jean-d'Angely, to leave for Sedan with the Regiment depot.*”° 





305 


Page 306 


Order that the depots of the three Polish regiments of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, which 
are on the side of Bordeaux, go to Sedan. These deposits will leave to the places where they are 
what will be necessary to the regiments that come back from Andalusia and which will pass to 
these deposits. It is necessary that these regiments find, when they arrive at Sedan, what they 
should wear and equip themselves with, and put themselves in a position to continue their march 
to enter the country when they arrive in the Grand Duchy. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18572. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS 
Paris, March 12, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, give me the situation of the cavalry of the Grande Armée, arm by arm 
and regiment by regiment. That this situation starts on March Ist; let it make known to me the 
condition on the 1st of March of the men of each regiment on horseback returned to Germany, 
first column; in a second column, which is on horseback en route to join, with the time of 
departure and arrival; in a third column, which is on foot at the Hanover depot; in a fourth 
column, what exists in France; in a fifth column, men to receive from the conscription of 1812. It 
will make known in the same state the existing horses, to receive either in France or in Germany. 
Finally you will also let me know what would be available in men mounted depots, March 15, 
and what would be available, dressed and equipped, but not mounted, that could be sent to 
Germany for take horses. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18573. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 12, 1812. 


Cousin, send today the aide-de-camp of the Duke of Ragusa. Send to this marshal that 
you have put before me his last letter; that the meeting of his forces in Salamanca is not 
sufficient for the purpose he has to fulfill; that it is necessary that he bridge the Agueda and have 
a bridgehead so that, if the enemy leaves less than five divisions on the right bank of the 
Tagus, 


306 


Page 307 


can be carried on the Coa, on Almeida, and ravage all the north of Portugal; that the rainy season 
must end; that if Badajoz is taken by two simple English divisions, and that he, Duke of Ragusa, 
has retained five English divisions on the right bank, the capture of Badajoz can not be imputed 
to him, and will fall entirely upon the army of the South; that if, on the contrary, the enemy 
weakens by more than five divisions and leaves only two or even three or four on the right bank, 
it will be the fault of the army of Portugal if it does not work. on the corps of the enemy, does not 
invest Almeida, does not ravage all the north of Portugal and does not throw parties until the 
Mondego; that finally the main role of the army of Portugal is reduced to this: to hold in check 
six divisions of the English army or at least five, to take the offensive in the North, or if the 
enemy took the initiative or, if any other circumstance orders it, send the Tagus to Almaraz, to 
raise the siege of Badajoz, as many divisions as Lord Wellington has done. 

When you have sent this letter, you will tell the aide-de-camp to come to the Elysee at 
eight o'clock; I will say a word to him. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18574. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 13, 1812. 


Cousin, tell the Duke of Reggio that I will probably send him orders to be executed on 
the 20th; that Iam not yet decided on this movement, but that I thought it my duty to warn him, 
so that, receiving the orders, he could execute them twenty-four hours later. The brigade 
Corbineau and the division of cuirassiers with twelve pieces of light artillery, forming 3 or 4,000 
horses, will pass first the bridge of Magdeburg to go on Berlin. He, with his person, with his 
headquarters and the Legrand division, would come a day later. The division Verdier would 
leave the same day of Brunswick, the park of the army would leave with the division Verdier. 
The Belliard division would centralize in Magdeburg. The marshal would enter Berlin with his 
4,000 cavalry and Legrand division. The Verdier division would remain in Magdeburg. The park 
would stay there too. Things would stay that way until further notice. It is therefore necessary 
that the troops of the Verdier division take position between Brunswick and Magdeburg,*”” 





Page 308 


and that the companies are placed in such a way as to be able to open in twenty-four hours. The 
marshal will have an instruction on how to behave and what he must do; he still has only to 
prepare himself and not let anything transpire from this movement. Its arrangements must be 
made in such a way as to be honored by the handsome dress of the army. He may stop, if 
necessary, one day at Brandenburg. It will have to avoid Potsdam, where, by the convention, one 
must not pass. I suppose that all his fleet will be well hitched, that each division will have its 
ambulances, that the army will have its military crews, and that nothing will be conducted by 
requisition. Send the Marshal an extraordinary dispatch on this subject, and that, by the return, he 
will let you know what will be the situation of his whole army in cavalry, infantry, engineers, 
artillery, sappers, etc., at the moment of his Entrance. His infantry might march in brigade, each 
brigade having, independently of its guns and caissons of regiments, to know: the Ist brigade, the 
artillery batteries on horseback, and the 2nd brigade, the batteries of artillery on foot. Generals, 
staff officers, ordering officers, etc., everyone will remain at his post and will only work with the 
troop. General Doumerc will command all the cavalry. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18575. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 13, 1812. 


Cousin, give me a report on the service of the courier. It becomes necessary to establish a 
courier from Paris to Magdeburg and Berlin. I think it will be necessary to keep the courier from 
Paris to Hamburg until April Ist. From April Ist, the line of the courier will be transported from 
Hamburg to Magdeburg, and there will be no other courier than that of Magdeburg in Paris by 
Mainz. On April Ist, the courier will go to Berlin and even to Stettin. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18576. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 14, 1812. 


Count Decres, give me a contribution in the day*”® 





308 


Page 309 


who will make known to me the name and the organization of the two flotilla battalions under 
the command of Vice-Admiral Ver Huell, and present me with a draft order for the departure of 
1,000 of these French or Dutch sailors for render diligently to Danzig. Propose me at the same 
time to send another of these French or Dutch sailors, well armed and well equipped, under the 
orders of Rear Admiral Baste, for Magdeburg. It is necessary that these men are armed, that they 
have their cartridges and cartridges. The two crews, both the one from the north and the one from 
Boulogne, and the company of 200 men of the sailors of the Guard that the Duke of Istria was 
ordered to send, will be under the command of Vice Admiral Ganteaume if he can follow the 
army. If Admiral Ganteaume is not in a position to make the campaign, Captain Motard can not 
come, Rear-Admiral Basle will command. Finally, the Viceroy took with him two companies of 
Italian sailors from Venice. That will make 2,400 sailors to the army, independently of the two 
battalions of marine workers, which will bring to 4,000 men the marine troops. 

You will entrust the execution of the orders relating to the movement of the flotilla on 
Cherbourg to another officer; besides, it seems to me that the season is well advanced for it to be 
prudent to make these movements before the enemy, especially for the prames. You will give me 
a report which will show me where the armaments are, and what will be convenient to do with 
what will remain at Boulogne. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18577. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTHE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 14, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the Rifle Brigade of the Guard arrived at Bayonne on the 13th; the 
brigade of the Ist in regiments of voltigeurs and tirailleurs arrived on the 14th. It is my intention 
that these eight battalions leave station of the place where they will meet to go to Paris, doing 
three or four stages a day. Charge the Duke of Istria to send to these regiments an officer who 
will carry your orders to the different prefects so that everything is prepared. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war.*” 


309 


Page 310 


18578. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 14, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, show my discontent to the general who commands the island of Elba the 
little education of the 7th battalion of the 6th line and the 14th light; these men scarcely know 
how to handle weapons; it is the fault of this general: if he had made them exercise, and if he had 
passed the magazine himself every week these men, who had almost nothing to do, would be 
today perfectly educated. Make him the same reproach for the men drawn from the battalions of 
the Mediterranean. 

Testify my discontent to the general who commands in Corsica the poor quality of the 
supplies made to the soldiers by the administration of the regiment of the Mediterranean. The 
shirts and shoes are so bad that the soldier could not use them. Have an investigation done to find 
the perpetrators of the infidelities and wrongdoings that have been committed. 

Write to the Grand Duchess so that all the troops that are on the island of Elba are 
reunited with the battalion every day, so that within a month, clicks can begin the exercise on fire 
and be perfectly educated. Recommend that he send officers to oversee the execution of his 
orders. 

If the battalion commander of the 3rd foreign battalion, who arrived at Livorno, is not 
good, we must put another one. 

The secretary of the commandments of the Grand Duchess must not correspond with you; 
write that it is not suitable; that he can make the letters, but that everything must be signed by the 
Grand Duchess or by her husband; that this way of doing things is ridiculous and contrary to the 
dignity of my ministers and to the good of the service; that in the army there is no rank; the King 
of Spain must himself write to the Minister of War, as he writes to the Major-General when he 
reports to him the command I have given him. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18579. - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DE LA RIBOISIERE, 
COMMANDING THE ARTILLERY OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 14, 1812. 


Count de la Riboisiére, I send you this letter by 





310 


Page 311 


one of my pages, to be sure that it will be delivered to you personally, and so that it does not 
come out of your hands. The object of this letter is to let you know (and I put you alone in my 
secret) that my intention is to begin in the countryside by the siege of Dinabourg and that of 
Riga. I intend the Danzig siege crew for Riga and the Magdeburg siege crew for Dinabourg. 
Take indirect and secret information on these two places, and let me know, by a note written in 
your own hand, the composition of one and the other of these places. Let me know how many 
ships it would take to embark the crew of Magdeburg; there is no time to lose, wanting it to be 
embarked on April 1, to be transported by the Vistula. Let me know how many days it takes for 
this crew to arrive in Bromberg, it would have to be there on May Ist. He will have to descend 
and continue navigation on the Haff, enter the Haff of Memel, and go up the Niemen to Vilna, 
where it will be carried on the ground in front of the place of Dinabourg, which is a journey of 
about forty leagues. Could the same boats suffice for this whole trip, or should they break the 
load, and how many times? It will be necessary for this crew to arrive on | June in Vilna, in 
order to open the trench in mid-June. 

In the material you have to carry, put the material of the engineers, not judging it 
necessary to put the general of engineers in my confidence. 

How many boats are needed to carry the crew of Danzig? From Danzia, this crew will 
have to be transported, either on Memel or on Tilsit, from there to go on the ground in front of 
Riga; it is a journey of about sixty leagues. Can the same boats go to Tilsit or Memel? What day 
must the loading take place at Danzig, and how many days it is necessary to operate the 
transport? It is essential that it be done only at the right moment, so as not to expose anything; 
the loading of the crew of Magdeburg will not expose anything, since it can be supposed 
intended for the armament of Danzig or Thorn. Finally, let me know how many wagons it will 
take to transport one and the other of these crews from Vilna to Dinabourg and from Memel to 
Riga. I suppose that the siege of these places will not stop me more than fifteen days, namely: 
five days for the investment, the opening of the trench, the construction of the batteries and the 
beginning of the fire, and ten days of open trench. It is therefore necessary that the supplies 
should nae arrived in a fortnight, at the rate of one convoy a day, from Memel and Vilna. What 
portion 


31 


Page 312 


will the army be able to supply for this cart, and what portion will it be necessary to take in the 
country? 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Count de la Riboisiére. 


18580. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 15, 1812 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I do not wish to buy brandy in Vienna; but I authorize you 
to instruct Count Otto, my ambassador, to deal with a supplier for the purchase of two millions 
of bottles of Hungarian wine, with the conditions that he will not return to more than ten under 
the bottle returned to Warsaw; which will make the expense of one million. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18581. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 15th, 1812. 


Cousin, give the most exact order to General Dorsenne to remove the three marching 
regiments of the army of Portugal for this army. This order does not suffer from delay, it is 
necessary that these three regiments join. 

Give him the order to send officers to search for the Palombini division to hasten his 
march. 

The seven infantry marching regiments of the Army of the South, forming a single 
column with the regiments of cavalry march, will go to Madrid and thence to Seville, to 
strengthen their regiments. All marching regiments of the Army of Portugal will go to the army 
of Portugal, where they will be dissolved, and the cadres will join their depots. 

The North Army shall be composed as follows: of Cuffarelli Division, Palombini 
Division, Guard Division, 2nd, 3rd Voltigeurs and Skirmishers, National Guards, ten battalions, 
and one division consisting of the 40th and 34th line, the remaining 34th light, 113th and Swiss 
detachments. 

Reiterate the order that all that belongs to the Paris Guard join immediately in France. 

Make known to General Dorsenne that one sends to San Sebastian, *! 


312 


Page: 313 


at Vitoria, at Burgos, regiments of march, but it is necessary that at the moment when troops 
return from Spain the Spaniards see troops returning to the interior of Spain. 
Order that all that belongs to the Army of Valencia depart from the Army of the North to 
go there. 
These different orders suffer no delay in their execution. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18582, - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 16, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, in my last trip to Holland, I ordered by various decrees that several 
departmental companies were increased. Yet there is nothing done, and when we speak of these 
decrees to the prefects, they do not even know what it means, Send these decrees to Hogendorp; 
instruct him to review these companies and take all necessary measures to ensure that before the 
end of April they are organized in accordance with my decrees, 

Present me also a plan of instruction to General Molitor and the commander of the 31st 
Military Division, so that in case of events we can bring these companies into a provisional 
battalion; which, added to the guard of Rotterdam and Amsterdam, must make a corps of more 
than 3,000 men for the defense of the country. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18583. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 16, 1812, 


My cousin, make known to the King of Spain, by an extraordinary messenger who will 
leave this evening, that I entrust to him the command of all my armies in Spain, and that Marshal 
Jourdan will fulfill the duties of chief of staff. You will at the same time give this order to 
Marshal Jourdan. You will inform the King that I make my intentions known from the political 
point of view through the channel of my ambassador. 

You will write to Marshal Suchet, to the Duke of Dalmatia, and to the Duke of Ragusa, 
whom I entrusted to the King of Spain the command of my? 


313 


Page 314 


armed in this kingdom; that Marshal Jourdan should act as chief of staff, and that they should 
comply with all the orders they would receive from the King in order to make the armies march 
in the same direction. 

You will write, moreover, particularly to the Duke of Ragusa, that the necessity of 
putting all in the armies of the South, of Valencia, and of Portugal, has determined me to give the 
King of Spain the command of these armies, and that he must regulate his movements on the 
orders he receives. 

In the day of tomorrow, you will write more in detail to the King, but it is necessary to 
send a courier tonight to Bayonne. You will order General Huillier to send an officer on duty to 
carry your letter to the King. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to original. Deposit of the war. 


18584. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 16, 1812, 


Cousin, let Prince Eckmiihl know that I have sent him orders of movement for the Ist of 
April, on the supposition that the Russians will not leave their frontier and will not begin 
aggression; that in this case all that I ordered will be executed literally, and that the main thing 
will be to rest the troops, to have them well nourished, to organize the bridges and bridgeheads 
of the Vistula, and to be in a word, master from there to begin the campaign with activity, if 
hostilities take place. If, on the other hand, the Russians begin hostilities and enter Prussia or the 
states of the Grand Duchy, the 5th corps, which is about 40,000 men, commanded by Prince 
Poniatowski, would be supported by the 7th, who is 20,000 strong, and the 8th, which is also 
20,000 strong. The King of Westphalia, who will be sent to Krossen on the Ist of April, at the 
head of his contingent, and who will follow his march to Warsaw, will then take command of 
these three corps, which will be commanded by Prince Poniatowski and by General Vandamme 
and Reynier, and with these three corps would see to cover Warsaw. The Ist corps advancing on 
the Alle, on Osterode, Allenstein, and Guttstadt, would threaten to turn the corps which would 
lead to Warsaw by Grodno and force the enemy to keep the Niemen. Moreover, on the first news 
of 





314 


Page 315 


Prince of Eckmiihl, the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Corps, would march on Krossen, Berlin, Kiistrin, and 
Glogau, and all three would march to Thorn, bringing together 250,000 men on the left. I desired 
that the Prince of Eckmiihl should know these general ideas, so that he behaved accordingly. 

It is necessary to ignore until the last moment that the king of Westphalia must command 
my right. 

If, on the contrary, the Russians make no movement, then Prince Poniatowski will place 
the Saxons and Westphalians between Kalisz and Warsaw to feed them more easily. The Ist 
Corps will make its movement as I ordered, and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th corps and the Guard will 
advance successively and methodically in the course of April. The general headquarters will be 
in Berlin on April Ist. 

The Prince of Eckmiihl must, on the contrary, be announced at Warsaw with all his army 
corps, as if he were destined to go there. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18585, - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 16, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the Duke of Elchingen, 1st to occupy Torgau as bridgehead instead 
of Wittenberg; 2nd to bring on the Elbe all the cavalry and the park, which are behind at Gotha, 
and elsewhere, extending into the country of Dessau, which will be evacuated by the 
Westphalians, whose movement begins on the 24th; so that on the Ist of April his whole Corps, 
as well as the 2nd corps of cavalry, should be huddled from Leipzig to Torgau and Wittenberg, 
and that, if he receives the order on the Ist of April, he can start to go on the Oder. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18586. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 16, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the Duke of Reggio to have the bridge of the Elbe pass from the 
21st to the 24th, to the brigade of cavalry of General Corbineau, and to the 3rd division of 
cuirassiers with its twelve pieces of light artillery; to direct these 4,000 horses on 
Brandenburg,’ 





315 


Page 316 


to have Legrand's division passed on the following day, and to direct it also to Brandenburg, at 
the same time to set in motion the Verdier division, and to direct it also to Brandenburg; to pass 
his park and direct it on Brandenburg: to assemble the whole Belliard division in Magdeburg. 
The cavalry and the Ist infantry division will remain at Brandenburg the time necessary to enter 
Berlin only on March 28, when the marshal will enter with his 4,000 cavalry, his 1st division, the 
artillery of his division, and the military crews of his division. The Verdier division will remain 
in Brandenburg with the Army Park. The Belliard division will pass the Elbe on the 27th or the 
28th, and will be confined between Magdeburg and Brandenburg. 

You will communicate to the Duke of Reggio the extracts of the treaty with Prussia 
relating to the non-occupation of Potsdam. He must, therefore, take a different route from 
Brandenburg than that of Potsdam, where his troops can not enter. He must also not occupy the 
Charlouenburg Palace nor the King's Palace in Berlin. 1,500 Prussians have to go to Potsdam; a 
company must stay to keep Charlottenburg; another Prussian company must also remain to guard 
the Berlin Palace. There must be no troops at Spandau; the Prussians will only have invalids 
there. The Duke of Reggio will let me know in what situation this place is. Without occupying 
the fortress, it is necessary to place a battalion in the city. Order General Headquarters to stay 
two or three days in Erfurt; afterwards, he will continue his journey to Berlin, where it is 
necessary that he does not arrive before April 1, that is to say that he must arrive there only two 
days after the Marshal Duke of Reggio will have entered it. Submit to my approval the road that 
the headquarters must make every day. Write to Count Saint-Marsan to tell him roughly the 
movement of the 2nd corps, commanded by the Duke of Reggio. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18587. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 16, 1812. 


Cousin, inform the Prince of Eckmithl that, on the 28th of March, the 2nd corps enters 
Berlin; that the 3rd Corps, under the Duke of Elchingen, will be in the first days of April on the 
Oder at Krossen; that the Bavarians and the 4th corps or the army of Italy arrive at Glogau;*’° 





316 


Page 317 


that henceforth I can not give orders of detail; that I can only give instructions, since we are 
approaching the frontiers of the enemy; that it is my intention that General Dessaix leave on the 
1st of April from Kiistrin, with the 2nd Light Cavalry Brigade of the Ist Army Corps and the two 
regiments of his division which are at Kiistrin, to proceed to Posen, that the regiment of his 
division which is at Glogau also moves to Posen, so that before the 10th of April this general, 
with his division, with the artillery of his division, and the brigade of light cavalry, reunited at 
Poseu. He will send forward wars commissioners to ensure that the food is ensured to his troop. 
On leaving Kiistriu, he will distribute the bread for four days, and he will carry it for four days 
with him, so that his march will not slow down and that the soldier will lack nothing. General 
Bruyére's cavalry division and Gudin's division will be on Thorn, where they can also be from 
the 10th to the 12th. A division of the corps will be able to move by the road, along the sea, to 
arrive more quickly to Danzig, without however passing to Kolberg, which we must not occupy. 
The big cavalry will march on Marienwerder. The Prince of Eckmiihl will carry his headquarters 
and the park of his year to Thorn. From the 10th to the 15th of April, he will occupy Marienburg 
and work without delay to establish the bridges at Dirschau and Marienburg, if, however, the 
debacle took place. He will have the works of Marienburg work to raise them and put them in 
condition, so that fifteen days later they can be armed. He will also raise the bridgehead of 
Marienwerder and restore the bridge. At the same day, Ist April, Prince Eckmiihl will order the 
Saxons to leave Krossen (1) on the 30th to march on Kalisz; to Prince Poniatowski to unite all 
the Poles in Warsaw, by bringing to Warsaw all that might be on Posen's side, and also 
withdrawing all that would be at Thorn; so that, in the event of an event, Prince Poniatowski had 
to defend the Duchy the three Polish divisions and the Saxon corps, which from Kalisz could 
quickly reach Warsaw. 

Thus, from the 10th to the 12th, if the Russians did not make any movement which 
obliged the prince of Eckmiihl to change these dispositions, the headquarters will be at Thorn, 
having in quarterings in front, but not very far, the light cavalry and the whole Ist cavalry corps; 
having at Thorn a division; in with another in Posen; the 7th division united at Marienburg, and 
the three others lying, one on Marienwerder and the environs, and two on Danzig; Polish 





1) The Saxons were in Guben and not in Krossen: see the following letter. *'” 


317 


Page 318 


assembled on Warsaw, their light cavalry forward; the Saxons at Kalisz, ready to go to Warsaw. 
The Stettin garrison will be formed by several battalions of the Daendels division, as well as the 
Kiistrin garrison. If the Russians do not commit hostilities, either by entering Prussia or entering 
the Grand Duchy, the Prince of Eckmiihl will thus allow all his troops to rest until the 15th of 
April, and by that time will have new instructions. 

It is necessary, 1st to supply Thorn; for this purpose I have asked that Prussia pay a large 
part of what she must pay; Secondly, I wish the Prince of Eckmiihl to send all his goods to 
Kiistrin's stores, in flour, wheat, biscuit, oats, etc., and bring him to Thorn; I also want him to 
put, either in his caissons or in wagons, as much biscuit and flour as he can at Stettin, and also 
direct them to Thorn; Thirdly, that Thorn be given at once a handling capable of making 60,000 
rations of bread a day, and that a large shop be established there. In Danzig we must have 
2,000,000 rations of biscuit, independently of 250,000 quintals of flour, with a great deal of 
biscuit and rice; it is necessary that we have buildings to board this. We must secure 300,000 
quintals weight of marc of wheat, and 100,000 quintals of rye, so as to have, to us, 600,000 
quintals at Danzig, including the 25,000 quintals already existing, It is necessary that the Grand 
Duchy immediately make stores in Modlin and Warsaw to feed the army. Finally, the general 
headquarters to be on the Ist of April in Berlin, the Intendant General and the generals 
commanding the artillery and the engineers, who arrive in this city, will give from there the 
orders of detail for their service. 

Let me know if you have a number with Prince Eckmiihl; if you do not have one, 
establish one with him and with all the corps d'armee, because my intention is to send them in 
figures the orders for the most important movements. Directly inform General Reynier, who 
commands the Saxons, of the order he will receive from the Prince of Eckmithl to leave on the 
Ist of April to go to Kalisz. Recommend that he send an aide-de-camp to Prince Poniatowski to 
inform him that he will be able, if necessary, to assist Warsaw and support the corps of the Grand 
Duchy. Order the Westphalian corps to cross the Elbe at Dessau on the 24th, and to march on 
Krossen, so that he may arrive on the Ist or 3rd of April. Also instruct Prince Eckmihl of the 
Westphalian corps movement on Krossen, and that®! 





318 


Page 319 


corps must go to Kalisz and beyond on Warsaw. The prince of Eckmihl would activate the 
march of this corps according to the circumstances, that is to say if the Russians began the 
hostilities and threatened Warsaw, which I do not think. If there is nothing new, the Westphalian 
corps will rest for a few days, and I will send them orders before the 10th of April for continual 
movement. 

These 400,000 quintals, to be procured at Danzig, will be taken by requisition; 
Individuals will be sent before the Intendant General to regulate prices and payments. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18588. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 16, 1812. 


My Cousin, there is a mistake of writing in my last dispatches. The Saxon corps is in 
Guben and not in Krossen. You must therefore give him the order simply to leave his current 
cantonments to go to Kalisz, leaving him master to pass the Oder where he deems it suitable. 
You must lead the Westphalians, not on Krossen, but on Sorau and Spremberg. Make them go on 
little walks and give them stays every three days; they will take two days off around Sorau and 
Spremberg. You will inform me of the day when they will arrive on these two points, so that I 
give orders to make them continue their movement on Glogau and Kalisz. So, instead of arriving 
at Glogau on the 3rd, they would only arrive on the 5th or 6th. 

NAPOLEON. 
P. S. Tell me, then, when the Bavarians and the Army of Italy arrive at Glogau. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18589. - INSTRUCTIONS DICTATED BY THE EMPEROR 
ON THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES OF THE BIG ARMY. 
Paris, March 16, 1812. 


Ist. That which is relative to the deposit of Hanover will not be part of the duties of the 


intendant. General Bourcier will continue to correspond with the Minister of War 
Administration, who?!” 


319 


Page 320 


pay the expenses of the depot, and with the Minister of War, as regards the horses intended for 
the artillery. 

2nd All that is relative to the formation and payment of the three companies of the 6th 
battalion of the military equipages, which are formed in Hanover, will not look at the Intendant 
General. 

3rd The hospitals and the service of the 32nd military division will not look at the 
intendant. The authorizing officer of Hamburg, however, will correspond with the intendant for 
all relations with the army. The minister will make all the expenses of this division. 

4th The same thing for the department of the Lippe, dependent on the 25th military 
division. 

5th The minister of the administration of war will make special funds, and through the 
intendant, to pay the battalion of military crews to the Comtoise and that of oxen which are 
formed at Danzig, and finally for all which is relative to the increase of the Polish army, 
according to the last treaty. 

6th All that is relative to the execution of the treaty with Prussia shall be directed to the 
steward, as well as the employment of the 15,000 horses and all the expenses of the depots of 
Berlin, Frankfort-on-the-Oder, or any other which would be established with Prussian horses. 
Now Prussia must supply 3,000 horses of heavy cavalry and 6,000 of light cavalry; this makes it 
necessary, if not 9,000 saddles, at least 6,000, because it is very much to suppose that to say that 
on 3 lost horses we will find a harness. These horses are intended, not for the ride, but to repair 
the losses. 

General Bourcier will come to the head of this depot, when his affairs at Hanover are 
over. The Hannover depot is intended to walk men from France. Meanwhile, it is necessary that 
a general, having several officers at his disposal and a commissioner of wars, should come to 
establish himself at the head of the depot of the Prussian horses. The major general will propose 
me this general tomorrow. It requires a general of probity free from any surprise. He will be 
independent of General Bourcier until he has finished his work in Hanover. 

The harnesses will not be made in Prussia, but taken from the consignments of the 
minister and the corps. The 6,000 draft horses will be given: 5,000 to the artillery, 1,000 to the 
military crews. The harnesses will also be provided on the harnesses that the battalions will send 
for replacement. Of the 6,000 spare harnesses, there may be some left over, because you lose less 
harness than saddle.*”” 





320 


Page 321 


7th The 6,000 horses, with the exception of those of the battalion, which is formed at 
Danzig, are only intended to repair the losses of battles or marches. 

8th If the Minister has made arrangements to mount the battalion which is formed at 
Danzig, he must annul his orders. 

9th The convention says that horses will be supplied quarterly in four months: this is 
impossible and useless; when this delivery is made in six or seven months, there would be no 
inconvenience. 

10th I guess we have provided in the budget for the mass manufacture of deposits. 

11th Cavalry regiments could not provide on their masses: so a fund for extraordinary 
expenses, because the deposits are bad, for lack of these small sums, and this delays the 
availability of horses. 

12th We must ask that the horses be delivered on the Vistula, near Graudenz and Marien 
Uerder, between the Vistula and the Oder, on a point of the most suitable channel to serve as a 
deposit, and finally for a very small quantity on the Berlin side. 

13th It will, moreover, be necessary for the intendant to know where the Prussians are 
coming from, so that, according to the circumstances, we can direct their march, particularly 
from those who come from Silesia. One must be very rigorous on the choice; Bad horses are 
good for nothing. 

The service of the army is divided into districts: between the Rhine and the Elbe, between 
the Elbe and the Oder, between the Oder and the Vistula, between the Vistula and the Russian 
borders. 

As for the communication routes of the army, a road will leave Mainz and go to 
Magdeburg, from there to Kiistrin, Posen, and go on one side to Warsaw, on the other to Thorn, 
and to the third side to Danzig. 

The extensions will be made as the movements are unmasked beyond the Vistula. 

Another route will go from Wesel to Magdeburg, Berlin, Stettin and Danzig; a fork will 
fall on Dirschau and Marienburg. Another route will go from Hamburg to Stettin. Finally another 
route will go from Mainz to Wurzburg, Bamberg, Kronach, Leipzig, Torgau, Glogau, and from 
there to Posen, from Glogau a branch will go to Kalisz and Warsaw. 

Another route will go from Innsbriick, Augsburg, Nuremberg, and join the former to 
Bromherg. 


All these roads are necessary to relieve the country; a>”! 





321 


Page: 322 


immense movement could not take place on a single road without exhausting it. 

There will be neither commander nor commissioner of wars between the Tyrol, the Rhine 
and the Elbe; it will be an economy of employees and commanders. Prince Primate, Prince of 
Nassau, Princes of Saxony, Governor of Erfurt, Saxony, will provide for it. They will have allied 
gendarmerie, with a detachment of their troops, commissioners of wars, municipal and all that is 
necessary. 

On the Wesel side, we will cross the 32nd Military Division and Westphalia, which will 
provide for it. 

Thus there will be no gendarmerie, nor any French employee, except one or two 
inspectors or commissioners of war, to ensure the good condition of hospitals, shops, and check 
complaints. 

In Magdeburg, there will be a French commander and a French administration. In 
Prussia, French commanders and French force are needed; but there must be no commissioner of 
wars or French employees; the locals will provide for it. In the Duchy of Warsaw, neither French 
ambulances nor French administrations; there will be military depots of the Grand Duchy. 
Nevertheless there will be in Magdeburg a superior officer who will have the police of the whole 
country between the Elbe and the Rhine, will receive the reports of all the roads on the 
movements, the hospitals and the service in general. Some commissioners of wars or deputies, 
some surgeons and doctors will be necessary for the surveillance on the various points. It is 
presumed that a hospital will be needed in Fulde, Erfurt, Leipzig, Magdeburg, Wesel, Miinster, 
Osnabriick, Braunschweig, and all roads, all of which are the administrations of the country; so 
that the patients who would have remained in some other places were, in a few days, transported 
to these establishments and under the inspection of the administration of Magdeburg. 

In Brandenburg there will be a hospital, one in Berlin, one in Kiislrin, one in Stettin, one 
in Bromherg, one in Posen, one in Glogau, one in Marienwerder, one in Marienburg, one in 
Danzig. Following what was done in the last war, we will settle what must be established on the 
line; we do not believe that we need more than one of five in five steps. 

14th If the order of the day prescribed by His Majesty does not exist, it should be 
provoked. 

15th We have said that the headquarters of the administration and** 


322 


Page 323 


the military between the Rhine and the Elbe would be in Magdeburg: between the Elbe and the 
Oder, he will be in Berlin; between the Oder and the Vistula, at Posen. The Major General will 
present the draft of the Territorial Division established in the last war, in the form of an agenda, 
to serve as a rule to the Intendant General, so that the military, the administration and the police 
are the same center and within reach to remedy all abuses. 

16th No man shall walk in isolation; All will be gathered at Mainz, Wesel, or Verona, 
and will leave at the times when the convoys must leave, to train the escorts. There must be 
about two convoys a month; that's enough. 

17ht All the troops must sleep in Magdeburg and Berlin, where there will be a superior 
administration, which will receive from the Major General the order of their direction. 

18th The effects of small equipment will be delivered in Berlin, Thorn and Warsaw. 

19th. As the convoys arrive from France, without holding on to any corps, we will take 
the orders of His Majesty for direction. 

20th It will be necessary for the minister of the administration of war to have on his 
behalf effects, and especially shoes, at Verona, Strasburg, Mayence, and Wesel, in order that all 
men should go on the offensive. 

21st Equipment and armaments will also be given in Berlin, Thorn and Warsaw. 

22nd The men coming out of the hospitals, who will not come from rancor, will join a 
depot of convalescents on the places of the Oder of the Vistula, in accordance with the orders of 
the army, where they will be dressed and united to the men of their corps to join their army corps 
together. 

The staff must seek the state of the location of the depots which were formed in Prussia 
during the first campaign, and renew the orders so that no single man should pass more in 
isolation the Rhine, the Elbe, the Oder or the Vistula, unless it is by wagon. 

23rd The decree on clothing shall be sent to the major-general and the intendant-general, 
so that they are well acquainted with what is ordered for this service. 

His Majesty will leave nothing to chance or the arbitrariness of the employees. He does 
not want to take anything or have it made by the country. Two garment factories will be 
established, one in Danzig, the other im 


323 


Page 324 


Glogau; that of Glogau will be assigned to the regiments whose deposits are in Italy. 

The intendant will receive every month the money brought into the budget of the 
administration of the war, and will have to organize deposits under the supervision of the director 
of clothing. 

The first work to be done to His Majesty to inform him of the arrival of the first convoy, 
which is already in progress, and which belongs to the administration of the war. 

24th The attached statement gives information of the commodities which Prussia must 
furnish in March, April, & c. His Majesty's intention is, that they be specially paid to Thorn, 
Konigsberg, and Modlin; we must leave some for the places of the Oder; half to Thorn, one sixth 
to the Oder, one sixth to Modlin, one sixth to Konigsberg. 

All that Prussia. must supply what exists, in addition to the supplies necessary for 
Graudenz and Kolberg, to be delivered to Konigsberg; however, the condition will be put before 
my eyes as soon as the quantities are known. 

It is necessary that the Government of the Grand Duchy supply abundantly, and in the 
shortest possible time, Posen, Warsaw and the other points of stage. Thorn will be supplied by 
Prussia or France. 

All the grains, flour, biscuits and rice currently existing at Stettin, Ktistrin and Glognu 
will be sent immediately to Thorn, taking all these commodities to Kiistrin. 

The expedition will take place on April 1st. We will leave in places only what is 
necessary for their supply. The sixth of the supplies to be made by Prussia will supply enough 
space. Everything that is shipped from these three points must be converted into flour 
beforehand. 

The first care of the intendant general will be to present to me the state of what will be 
left in these places, and what will be sent out, by making known the number of boats that will be 
employed in this transport. A detachment of the crew battalion of sailors will be distributed on 
boats to learn this navigation. Road and bridge engineers will be employed on this canal to 
remove the obstacles that this navigation might encounter. If on the Ist of April there were still 
some, it would be transported all Thorn from Glogau, Stettin and Kiistrin by car. The Major- 
General ordered the moving corps to carry off everything they could. All the cars of the military 
crews that*~* 


324 


Page 325 


will arrive empty on the Oder will take care of flour and biscuit. We will ship to Magdeburg all 
the rice coming from Italy and the spirits coming from France to go on Kiistrin. 

There are 250,000 quintals of wheat in Danzig; I have long since ordered their conversion 
into flour; they must be boarded on boats to follow the movement of the army. It is necessary to 
make known the quantity of boats necessary, to procure them on the spot, to have them mounted 
by French sailors, and to place there commissioners of wars and agents of the administration. 

The Intendant General will have to consult with the commander of the artillery, who has 
a great quantity of boats at Magdeburg and Danzig. 

300,000 quintals of wheat and 100,000 quintals of rye, weight of marc, will be required at 
Danzig on the 5th of April at noon; which will bring the grain resources in Danzig to 650,000 
quintals. We will immediately convert them as quickly as possible into flour. 50,000 quintals 
will remain for the needs of the place; 600,000 quintals will be for the army. 

An intelligent officer, whose name will be made known to me, must be specially sent to 
direct the administration of the corps to Warsaw. 

The Intendant General will write to the Minister of War of the Grand Duchy that 
1,500,000 rations of flour and 500,000 rations of bread will be ready by the Ist of April; which 
will ensure the service of 100,000 men for twenty days. 

I must have 500,000 bushels of oats in Danzig. 

The divisions of the army corps being always together, and little reason to cause their 
dissemination in the immense plain, I think it would be convenient to establish a post office only 
at the headquarters of each army corps. However, if it is indispensable to give it to the French 
divisions, it must never be given to the allies. 

The postal service will be entirely regulated by the postal administration, and will be 
counted at the end of the campaign. The Minister of Finance will be warned. 

As for my service, the courier will be established from the Elbe to Paris, like France. 
Beyond the Elbe, the service will be made with horses of the country, but by French couriers; for 
this purpose, detachments of couriers will be established from thirty to thirty leagues. At the post 
of the general headquarters, there will be at the disposal of the grand equerry postillions and 
horses in sufficient numbers*”” 


325 


Page 326 


to do the service on a line of a hundred leagues, so that the last hundred leagues will always be 

served by horses and French postilions, and that, the ordinary posts of the army coming to be 

disturbed, my packet is never delayed of a moment. Without this establishment, we could be 

several days without mail, which happened. The Postmaster General will see the Grand Equerry 

to organize the mail and provide them with the necessary saddles and crews. As for the horses, 

he will have them bought from Danzig and Thorn; we would not be in time to send them. 
According to the copy comm. by Count Daru, 


18590. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE MINISTRY OF WAR, PARIS, 
Paris, March 17, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, you have read the decree of organization of the first ban of 
the National Guard. It is necessary that you send to the authorizing officers of the different 
divisions of the models of effects of clothing, and that you make write an instruction to let them 
know the prices and the various rules which they must observe, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18591. - TO COUNT DARU, MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 17, 1812. 


Count Daru, the Minister of the Interior has been sick for three months, and my business 
is suffering. Go to his house to see how he is doing. It would be appropriate for him to ask me to 
appoint someone to manage the ministry, as Count Cretet did. Eight days ago a council of 
subsistence must take place; during this time the people suffer from an evil to which no remedy 
is put. Whatever may be the zeal of the Minister of the Interior, no one can overcome nature; he 
will recover more quickly by taking two months rest, I would like the request to come from him, 
so that he does not believe that I want to take away his ministry. 

Before going to the Minister of the Interior, bring his doctor to his house to find out what 
kind of illness he has, and if it will last for a long time. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy comm. by M, Count Daru.*”° 





326 


Page 327 


18592. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 18, 1812. 


My cousin, order that the division of the old Guard (chasseurs and grenadiers), the 
regiments of chasseurs, dragoons and grenadiers on horseback, the artillery on horseback of the 
Guard, the artillery of the line attached to the Guard, the crews, the ambulances and any other 
Guard administrations, continue their journey on Wiirzburg. 

Order from the Fere, Metz, and Mayence all that will be possible to send for Wurzburg. 

NAPOLEON. 

P. S. Give me a state of motion of the Guard, division by division. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria. 


18593. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 19, 1812. 


Cousin, order General Grouchy to direct the 3rd Cavalry Corps, namely, the Kellermann 
Division and the Dragon Division, with the eighteen pieces of light artillery, so as to reach the 
head of the column, or less to gain as much advance as possible. Give the same order to the Duke 
of Abrantes. The cavalry must join, because we may need them. Order General Montbrun to 
return to Torgau on April 1 to take command of his corps. Order the Duke of Elchingen to carry 
the cavalry of the 2nd reserve corps in front of Torgau to take the head of the column and to 
march rapidly if circumstances so desired. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18594. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. March 19, 1812. 


My Son, on the 13th, 15th and 17th of February, the 5th battalion of the 6th of the line, 
the 5th battalion of the 14th light infantry and the marching battalion of the Ist regiment of the 
Mediterranean left from the island of Elba, together making 1,800 men. They passed in Florence 
on the 20th, the 22nd and the 24th; so they had to arrive before March 2 in Mantua.*”’ 





327 


Page 328 


I am surprised that you do not mention it in your letter of the 4th. You can put in sustenance in 
the 5th battalions of the light and sixth of the line the 500 men of the battalion of the 
Mediterranean, from which you can thus send back the setting on the island of Elba. The 5th 
battalions of the 14th and 6th will then be strong each of 900 men. Have both battalions started 
to continue their journey; send a review of their armaments and clothing to Verona; give them 
cartridges and go to your bodies. You will distribute these 1,800 men among your regiments who 
are at the Grande Armée; it will fill about half of the deficit that your regiments are experiencing. 
Be careful to incorporate light infantry men into light infantry regiments, and line-in-line 
regiments. I am told that clothing is in bad condition; rectify all this before leaving Mantua. I am 
very anxious that all the regiments that have left Italy should be worn by 140 men per company 
and be kept there. The 4th Battalion of the 8th Light must have arrived; as with the detachment 
of the 14th Light, the 8th and 18th Light will be strong enough, my intention is that the 4th 
Battalion of the 8th Light be sent to Trieste, where he will garrison. This will be the increase of 
one battalion for the Illyrian province; there are two, it will be three and can only be very useful. 
Take care that these men who come to you have two pairs of shoes in the bag and a good pair at 
their feet; have them complete this supply in Verona. 

It is indecent that the military road passes through Munich; it embarrasses the king; pass 
it through Augsburg, Nuremberg, Donauwetth, and thence to Glogau, where your army must be. 

You did not tell me about the arrival of the 300 men of the 92nd; in which regiments did 
you incorporate them? I send you the report of the ministers on the movement of the men of the 
6th and 14th. 

NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. the Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18595. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 20, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, there is no problem in writing these letters to the generals commanding 
the 17th and 31st military divisions. 

It will be necessary to give a new instruction to General Molitor, as soon as it is decided 
which troops should guard Holland.*”* 





328 


Page 329 


He is going to have two cohorts of the National Guards of the country, strong together of 1,600 
men; a battalion of departmental reserve companies; two battalions of the paid guards of 
Amsterdam and Rotterdam; which will make a good brigade of nearly 4,000 men. Independently 
of this, he has, I believe, had companies of artillery and foreign regiments, the strength of about 
3,000 men. General Molitor would have from that moment 7,000 men. In addition there will be 
in Holland six cohorts of National Guards of the Interior, who will meet at Utrecht; which will 
still make a brigade of 5,000 men. There will also be a brigade of six 4th battalions. Thus four 
brigades or 18 or 20,000 men will be in Holland. Antwerp, Bruges, Wesel, even Hamburg and 
Boulogne, will soon furnish another reinforcement of 25 to 30,000 men. 

It is necessary that the general of division know in advance the use he must make of these 
troops, not to order anything, but only to have an eye on their training, review and censor their 
behavior and their instruction, 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war, 


18596. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 20, 1812. 


My Cousin, order the Duke of Elchingen to send the 2nd Cavalry Reserve Corps, 
composed of the Wattier, Defrance, and Sebastiani Divisions, to Torgau on the Ist of April, to go 
to Frankfort-on-the-Oder, and take there cantonments. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18597. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS, 
Paris. March 20, 1812, 


Cousin, write to the Prince of Eckmiihl that the Bavarian corps will be the 28th at 
Glogau, and that, if there were anything new and demanding extraordinary measures, he is 
authorized to direct this corps on Posen. 

You know the destination I wish to give to General Marchand; it is necessary that it be 
returned on April Ist to Glogau. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.*”” 


329 


Page 330 


18598. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MISISTRE OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 21, 1812. 


Count Decres, I would like you to bring me plans and memoranda on Wednesday which 
convince me of the absolute impossibility of building ships of the line at Nantes, even with the 
perfection that the Rivoli example has given to our camels. I always attach the greatest 
importance to building ships at the mouth of the Loire. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original comm. by the Duchess Decrés, 


18599. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 21, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke of Reggio that, if there is nothing new after his entry into Berlin, 
he will send the Verdier division, which is at Brandenburg, on the Ist of April, to go directly, 
without going through Berlin, at Stettin, and place General Castex's light cavalry brigade under 
the command of General Verdier, who will establish this brigade on the road from Stettin to 
Stargard. The Belliard division will meet in Brandenburg. 

As too much cavalry might be injurious to Berlin, the Duke of Reggio will order the 3rd 
Division of Cuirassiers to carry his light artillery between Stettin and Kiistrin, in the vicinity of 
Schwedt, so as to reach the bridge of Schwedt. He will keep with him only the brigade of light 
cavalry of General Corbineau. 

You will inform Prince Eckmiihl of these dispositions, who, by this movement, will have 
near him on the Oder the Castex brigade and the 3rd division of cuirassiers, and all the cavalry of 
General Montbrun at Frankfort-on-the-Oder. . 

You will order General Saint-Cyr to begin sending the Bavarians on April 5th to Posen, 
and to maintain the best discipline among these troops. He will place the cavalry in the direction 
of Thorn, in the places where it will be able to live most easily, and its infantry in column from 
Posen to Gnesen. 

Instruct the Prince of Eckmiihl with this movement to order the Dessaix division to 
proceed to Thorn, and to have evacuated**” 





330 


Page 331 


the 10 or at the latest 12 Gnesen, since the head of the Bavarians must occupy this city, and the 
tail, Posen. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18600, - SPEECHES OF THE EMPEROR, 
Palace of the Tuileries, March 22, 1812, 


TO THE DEPUTATION OF THE ALLIER. 


I thank you for the sentiments you express on behalf of the electoral college of the 
department of Allier. My people will always see me ready to do anything to consolidate the 
destinies of this empire on immutable bases, and to make France triumph over the hatred of 
England. I have the confidence that no sacrifice will appear painful to the French, when I judge it 
necessary for the accomplishment of these great designs. 


TO THE DEPUTATION OF THE ARDENNES. 


The wishes you make for the future will be fulfilled: it must consolidate what was 
founded by the bravery of the French. The Ardennes department will always be at the forefront 
of its zeal and good spirit. I thank you for the sentiments you express on behalf of me. 


AT THE DEPUTATION OF INDRE-ET-LOIRE. 


The city of Tours, although one of the most beautiful of the Empire, suffers from the 
mediocrity of the harvest. Nine years of abundance succeed in France to a mediocre year. My 
people can not prove to me better the love they have for me than by showing the calm and 
resignation that circumstances require. I agree with your feelings. 


AT THE DEPUTATION OF LOIR-ET-CHER. 
The sentiments expressed by my people, in the different circumstances in which they are 
called near me, are dear and necessary to my heart. The government of the greatest empire in the 
world bears with it the worries which the love of the French alone can wipe off. 


AT THE DEPUTATION OF THE HAUTE-MARNE. 


I spent my first years in the midst of my Champagne peoples; I know how good they are 
and attached to what is estimable.**! 





331 


Page: 332 


I approve of the wishes that you form for me: they make me happy; I know they are real. 
Excerpt from the Moniteur of March 23, 1812. 


18601 - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 24, 1812. 


My Cousin, the division of General Bruyere, or the Ist of the light cavalry of the reserve, 
will be composed of two French brigades and a Polish brigade composed of three regiments of 
light cavalry, which Prince Poniatowski has already received, train and meet at Thorn. The 2nd 
Division, or the Wattier Division, will be composed of two French brigades and a brigade 
commanded by General Ornano, of the Wiirttemberg Light Horse Regiment, which has already 
served in the Prussian Campaign with the Cavalry Reserve, and two Prussian light horse 
regiments. The 3rd Division, or Kellermann's division, will be composed of two French and two 
Bavarian light cavalry regiments, and one Saxon light horse regiment, under the command of 
Brigadier General Dommanget. The 3rd Brigade of the Bruyére Division will take No. 15; the 
3rd of the Wattier Division will wear No. 16, and the 3rd of the Kellermann Division No. 17. 
Thus, each of these light cavalry divisions will be of a total of 6,000 men and a present of at least 
4,000. 

There will be a 4th corps of the reserve, composed of the 4th division of light cavalry and 
a 7th division of heavy cavalry. The 4th Light Cavalry Division will consist of two brigades, 
each of three Polish regiments, with a line of six Polish brigade artillery guns. A Polish 
divisional general and two Polish brigadier generals will command this division. The 7th Heavy 
Cavalry Division will be composed of a brigade of Saxon cuirassiers and a brigade of 
Westphalian cuirassiers, also having twelve pieces of light artillery. General Lorge will 
command this division. 

General Latour-Maubourg will have the command of the cavalry of all the right. 

The 5th corps will have three brigades of light cavalry, each composed of two Polish 
regiments; which will still employ six Polish regiments. 


Thus the sixteen regiments of Polish cavalry will be employed,** 


332 


Page 333 


namely, three at the Bruyere division, one at the Pajol brigade, six at the light cavalry division, 
and six with the three brigades of the 5th corps. These last three brigades will carry Nos. 18, 19 
and 20. 

The six light Saxon cavalry regiments will be employed in the following manner: two 
attached to the reserve division, one attached to the Kellermann division, the remaining three 
will form brigade, the brigade will carry No. 23 and will be attached to the corps of Saxon army, 

Of the six Bavarian regiments, two will be part of the Kellermann division, and four will 
form two brigades, which will be attached to the Bavarian corps and will carry Nos. 21 and 22. 

Of the four Westphalian regiments, two will be part of the 7th Heavy Cavalry Division, 
and two will be brigades attached to the Westphalian Corps under No. 24. 

Of the four Wurtemburg regiments, one will be part of the Ornano brigade, and three will 
form brigade will be attached to the 3rd corps and will carry No. 25. 

Finally you will present me the formation of two or three brigades with the Prussian 
regiments, which will take the following numbers. 

I desire you to give me a state of situation, thus composed, of all the cavalry. 

By this way. I will be master of passing a brigade of light cavalry from one corps to 
another, when the good of my operations will require it. 

The Ist corps will have resulted in two brigades, the 2nd corps will have two; the third 
Corps will have three; the fourth Corps will have two; the 9th Corps will have three; the sixth 
Corps will have two; the seventh corps will have a line; the 8th corps will have one, and the 
Prussians, who will form the 9th Corps, will have two or three; total brigades attached to the 
army corps, eighteen or nineteen. 

The Ist Corps will not find it enough; but, as it is probable that a Corps of heavy cavalry 
will always be held with this Corps, it will always have the means of being sufficiently 
enlightened. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18602, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 24, 1812. 


My cousin, order that the hundred guns that make up the siege crew of Magdeburg be 
shipped to Magdeburg*® 


333 


Page 334. 


to get to Bromberg. Guns, carts, wagons, trucks, carried-body, balls, powder, fireworks, will 
embark. Sixty or eighty boats must be sufficient. The artillery companies attached to the siege 
crew will embark with the crew. Everything will work in order, under the escort of an artillery 
officer of the rank of battalion commander at least. Arrived at Kiistrin, this crew will receive new 
orders to march on Bromberg. You will inform the commander of the artillery that, when the 
crew is returned to Bromberg, I will make known the use I wish to make of them; and then, if the 
hundred guns are not necessary to fulfill my purpose, I will only take fifty or sixty, and the other 
pieces will be used for the arming of Danzig and Thorn. 

It is necessary that your orders be given so that the hundred guns and all their supplies are 
returned to Bromberg in the first ten days of May; it must be from April 1 to April 5. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18603. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 24, 1812. 


My cousin, order that the siege crew of one hundred and thirty guns of Danzig be 
embarked on boats, guns, trucks, carriers, sails, powder, balls, etc. From April 15, the boats will 
be reunited. From the 20th to the 25th, the loading will begin, so that on the Ist of May the boats, 
in number necessary to carry this siege crew, could set in motion; the artillery companies 
destined for his service will escort him. 

I suppose that the commander of the artillery has given orders to transport from 
Magdeburg to Danzig the powders necessary for the arming of this place. 

Inform the Prince of Eckmihl of the orders you give for the embarkation of the siege 
crew of Danzig, and give me an account of the quantity of powder which will remain in this 
place after the departure of the siege crew. It is necessary that the complete supply for its defense 
is there. 

NAPOLEON 


From the original. Deposit of the war.*** 





334 


Page 335 


18604. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 25, 1812. 


My Cousin, by the movement of the Belliard division and the one that the Delaborde 
division is going to do, Magdeburg will be without garrison. It is necessary that you write to the 
king of Westphalia to send there his 4th regiment. Order the governor to keep, independent of 
the Westphalians, 2,000 French marching battalions; these battalions amount to a force of 9,000 
men, which must pass to Magdeburg. 

Write to the Duke of Reggio to know what strength would be left for garrison in Berlin, 
and what is the strength of the bourgeois guard who does the service. 

If, as a consequence of the Prince of Eckmiihl's movement on the Vistula, the Russians 
declared war by invading the Grand Duchy, it would be necessary that he should remove the 
Verdier division from Stettin, preceded by the light cavalry brigade of General Castex and the 
3rd division of cuirassiers; that with the rest of his army he should go to Stettin, and thence to the 
Vistula, to support the Prince of Eckmiihl; in this case he would leave a garrison regiment in 
Berlin. As the most retarding step is the park, it is necessary that the Duke of Reggio make him 
leave for Schwedt, when he leaves Brandenburg, placing him in favorable places between Stettin 
and Kiistrin, so that it is advanced all the more. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18605. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 25, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Duke of Elchingen to march on the 4th of April to go to Frankfort- 
on-the-Oder, where he will have his headquarters on the 10th. He will canton his troops in the 
neighborhood of Frankfurt and on the path of Posen, by occupying them in healthy countries, 
where the troops can recover well. You will let him know that if the Russian army makes no 
movement, my intention is to leave him a few days in this position; but that if, as a result of the 
ao of Prince Eckmihl on Thorn, Saxons and Westphalians on Warsaw and Bavarians on 
Posen, 





335 


Page 336 


the Russians were marching on the frontiers of the Grand Duchy or Prussia, it being necessary, 
foreseeing this case, that his troops should be disposed in such a way that he could at once 
emerge by Posen and quickly proceed to Thorn. He will send one of his aides-de-camp to the 
Prince of Eckmiihl, who will be the 10th at Thorn to know the situation of things. But the 
difficulty of obtaining fodder brings me to leave him a few days on the Oder; which will be 
useful to the repose of his troops, if the movements of the enemy do not compel him to do 
otherwise. 
NAPOLEON, 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18606. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 25, 1812. 


My cousin, order Major-General Walther to proceed without delay to Wurzburg to direct 
the movements of the Guard, Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery on Dresden. Horse hunters arrive 
on the 29th in Wiirzburg; the dragons arrive there on April 2, and the grenadiers on April 4. He 
will conduct these three cavalry regiments on Dresden, after giving them a stay in Wurzburg and 
a stay in Bamberg. He will give orders to the column of cavalry composed of the Polish regiment 
of light horse and two detachments of hunters and gendarmes elite of the Guard, who arrive on 
the 29th in Dresden, to stay there two days and continue his road to Glogau. The two artillery 
batteries which marched with this column will follow its movement on Dresden. 

Brigadier-General Boyer (1) will take temporary command of the two battalions of the 
3rd Grenadier Regiment, the two battalions of the 2nd Regiment and the two battalions of the 
2nd of Chasseurs. The 3rd regiment of grenadiers arrives on the 29th at Wurzburg; he will stay 
there for two days and will leave on April 1 for Dresden. General Boyer will march with this 
regiment. The 2nd regiment of grenadiers will leave on the 3rd of April, and the 2nd regiment of 
chasseurs on the 4th. All these regiments will have stays in Bamberg and wherever it is 
necessary. 

General Walther will become acquainted with the movement of the army of Italy, which 
is moving towards Dresden, to regulate its march so that there is no confusion, 

Old Guard battalions arriving on 10 April in Wiirzburg 





1) Boyer de Rebeval.**° 


336 


Page 337 


will stay there for two days and will start for Dresden. The two battalions of flankers, the sappers 
and the various artillery batteries will spend two days in Wiirzburg, two days in Bamberg, and 
will head for Dresden. 

You will reiterate the order to the Guard to send its luggage, caissons, ambulances and all 
his carriages, to go by Metz, Mainz and Wurzburg on Dresden. 

You will order General Sorbier to be returned from his person on the 8th of April at 
Wurzburg, to direct the movement of all the artillery of the Guard itself. 

You will give the same order to the engineer general. He will take all measures to ensure 
that his service is well organized. 

You will order Major-General Delaborde, who arrives on the 29th at Magdeburg, to stay 
there on the 30th and 31st, and to leave on the Ist of April for Stettin. You will allow this 
general, if two days of stay do not seem sufficient, to take two or three more. In view of the 
distance, I can only relate to this general; he is master of leaving only the 3rd or the 4th instead 
of leaving the Ist. He will take care to leave at Magdeburg a depot of sick or tired men, and 
horses broken up. 

You will order General Bourcier to lead the Guard's horses which are going up to 
Hanover on Stettin, where they will join the Delaborde division. 

Send these orders directly to General Walther and General Delaborde for execution. Send 
them also to the Duke of Istria, who, for his part, will see to their execution. 

Order General Saint Sulpice to be sent on April 6th to Wurzburg to take command of the 
three regiments of the Guard cavalry under General Walther. 

You will order that the order of the Guard, together with the Administrations, be returned 
to Wiirzburg on the 10th of April to arrive at Dresden before the Guard. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18607. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 25, 1812. 


Cousin, I see by the state of the situation of the Prussian contingent that ten battalions 
meet in Konigsberg and three in Berlin, >” 





337 


Page 338 


which makes thirteen battalions; that fourteen squadrons meet at Konigsberg, and two at Berlin, 
which is sixteen squadrons. Write to the King of Prussia's Minister of War that I would like the 
three battalions and two squadrons which meet in Berlin to join the five battalions and four 
squadrons which meet at Breslau, which would make eight battalions and six squadrons, or 6,000 
men of infantry and 1,200 horses assembled at Breslau; that I should like these troops to be ready 
to leave Breslau on the 10th of April; that the ten battalions and the fourteen squadrons which 
meet at Konigsberg, under the orders of the general who commands this auxiliary army, 
maneuvered with the Prince of Eckmuhl; that a sufficient garrison of these troops should be 
placed at Pillau, and that the rest should be under the command of this general; that, by this 
arrangement, I will leave the Prussian troops where they are, and that, when we see the turn of 
things, I will have the corps of Prussia united; that until then it seems to me necessary to leave 
them as they are. 

By this means the Prince of Eckmihl will find himself in the hands of 8,000 infantrymen 
and 3,000 more cavalrymen; which, with the Bavarians, will make available on the 10th of April 
on the Vistula 140,000 men, with whom he will be perfectly able to protect the whole Lower 
Vistula. Recommend to the Prince of Eckmiihl to endeavor to keep Pillau well. He will instruct 
General Grawert to inspect it and put a good garrison there with a good commander, taking all 
measures to ensure that this place is in perfect state of defense. 

You will order the Prince of Eckmiihl to leave from April 12 to April 15 two battalions, 
50 horses, a company of sappers and two pieces of artillery, Danzig, to build at the tip of the 
Nehrung a redoubt that crosses its fires with Pillau. The redoubt must be constructed in such a 
way that 300 men on the island side shelter it from a hand and give the time to come from 
Danzig. It is advisable that this operation not be done before the 15th of April. Materials which 
have been prepared against Pillau for the construction of this redoubt, will be used, keeping the 
part of the present works which may be useful. 

NAPOLEON 


From the original. Deposit of the war.*** 


338 


Page 339 


18608, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 25, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia that it is necessary that he be returned from his 
person on the 10th of April at Glogau, where he will find General Marchand and the generals 
employed on the right wing, and that the 12th Kalisz; that he must give no order, take no 
command except on his army corps, unless the Russians have made a move and declared war by 
attacking the Grand Duchy, in which case he should go to -the-field in Warsaw and take 
command of the right, consisting of the 5th, 7th and 8th Corps. He will be provided with 
undisclosed orders for Prince Poniatowski and General Reynier, announcing to these generals 
that they are under his orders with their corps. If the Russians make no movement, you will write 
to the King that he must remain in Kalisz, ignored and commanding his only corps. 

You will inform Prince Eckmiihl of these dispositions; you will inform him that the King 
of Westphalia must be returned on the 12th to Kalisz; that the Saxons will approach Pulawy and 
Sanrlomir, and that the Westphalian corps will be assembled on the 12th at Kalisz with the King; 
that General Marchand will fulfill the duties of Chief of Staff; that, if the Russians do not attack 
and declare war by violating Prussian or Polish territory, it is my intention that I, King of 
Westphalia, remain unknown at Kalisz, and take no other command than that of his corps; that, if 
not, he should go to Warsaw to take command of the right; that he is, for this purpose, the bearer 
of orders for Prince Poniatowski and General Reynier; that it is necessary, therefore, that as soon 
as the prince of Eckmuhl learns the declaration of war by the march of the Russians on the 
frontiers of the Grand Duchy or Prussia, he shall prevent the King of Westphalia. 

You will instruct the Prince of Eckmiihl that the Bavarians will be at Posen on the 20th of 
April; that on the 5th of April the 2nd corps of cavalry commanded by General Montbrun will be 
returned to Frankfort-on-the-Oder, that the Verdier division, with the Castex brigade and the 3rd 
division of cuirassiers, will be restored at Stettin, that the division of the Guard which General 
Delaborde commands will be restored to Stettin at about the same time, that, if the Russians 
make no movement, we must remain in the status quo, repair Marienburg, supply Thorn, Danzig. 
and do not move, since we are always at peace, and I would like?” 





339 


Page 340 


in this situation, to be able to win the month of May; but that, if the Russians declare war, the 
Prince of Eckmiihl must summon the Bavarians to Thorn, inform the Duke of Elchingen that he 
must march on Posen, and the Duke of Reggio, that he should march on the Vistula. The army of 
Italy will not be fully assembled at Glogau until the 15th of April. 

The language of the Prince of Eckmihl must therefore be very peaceful; he must avoid 
any recognition or military movement beyond the Vistula; it is necessary that none of its patrols 
go even to Osterode. 

As for the Prussian contingent, the general who will command it will be returned on the 
10th to Thorn. The Prince of Eckmiihl must employ a part of it to keep Pillau and place the other 
party on the Niemen to enlighten the march of the Russians; Of course, in case of an attack it 
would come together on the Vistula to the body of Prince Eckmiihl, who, by this means, would 
have his army corps, the Bavarians and the Prussians at hand, and would not delay to be joined 
by the Duke of Elchingen and Pal 'the Duke of Reggio. 

NAPOLEON, 

From the original Deposit of the war. 


18609. - NOTE DICTED IN THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS. 
Tuileries Palace. March 25, 1812. 


The Minister of the Navy reports a despatch he received from the Transportation Office 
regarding the exchange of prisoners. His Majesty thus indicates that he follows the answer to be 
made: 

I received your letter of the 10th of this month; I put it in front of the Minister of the 
Navy. The negotiation which took place by the channel of Mr. Mackensie, in the course of 1810, 
so simplified this question of the exchange, that, if the British government really wants the 
general exchange of the French and the allies of France against the English and the allies of 
England, this negotiation may be very nearly finished. The two governments agree in principle, 
but do not seem to agree in their intentions. The English government really wants to have only 
the English prisoners, and to be the master, when it has made this exchange, to continue the 
exchange of the rest of the French prisoners against the allies of England. The French 
Government does not wish to depend on a change of dispositions in the English Government, 
and it wants the mode of execution to assure the reality of the execution of the principle. 

According to the copy comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres.*“° 


340 


Page 341 


18610. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 26, 1812. 


Count Decres, the construction of the ships of line, not only of 74, but also of 80 and 
even three bridges, on the Loire, is of the highest importance: then Brest becomes only a place of 
armament, and ships are built at the mouth of the Loire. 

It has been many years since I have a presentiment that vessels can be built at the mouth 
of the Loire. The reports of the commission which I had established then did not seem to me 
convincing. Since frigates armed with six months of food and water and shooting 18 to 19 feet 
can go out to the Indies, how can light or armed vessels in flute and drawing 14 feet of water can 
not exit? Now, when it is proved that my ships can only go out in flute and pulling 15 or 16 feet, 
they will find themselves in the same position as the loaded frigates. It is to be presumed that 
they can only come out definitively in time of peace; but it will already be a great result of 
having seven or eight vessels on the shipyard in wartime, using precious woods that are rotting in 
Nantes, and would put us in a position to have at peace a great number of ships on all sides. 

Would we have to wait for peace? Who would prevent the launching of ships following 
the procedure that took place in Venice? The vessel was raised 5 feet 6 inches and passed with a 
draft of 13 feet 6 inches. 

We could, by bringing the unarmed ships in Mindin's harbor, arm them there, place them 
on the camels, and then, fully armed, shooting at most 14 feet of water, they would shoot 4 feet 
less than the frigates, for to go to the high seas. Thus a ship of 80, only firing with the camels 
less than 16 feet of water, would be in a condition at least inferior to the frigate. 

From Paimboeuf to Mindin there are two leagues; the vessel placed at Paimboeuf on 
camels could be set up so as to fire only 9 or 10 feet of water, and from then on could take the 
time necessary to reach Mindin's bay. But finally, if it were true that there were difficulties 
Paimboeut to Mindin, why not build in Mindin or Saint-Nazaire? From Saint-Nazaire to 
Mindin" 


341 


Page 342 


there are 1,000 toises; we can consider the mouth as perfectly defended. 

I think that M. Tupinier must be ordered to go to Paris with all due diligence, while 
writing to him the letter which you propose to make his observations and reports, his answer. He 
will go to Paimboeuf, Saint-Nazaire and Mindin, and will thus be able to make a good memory 
on this question, to which I attach so much importance, At the mouth of the Loire, one finds 
wood, hemp, masts, irons, artillery; everything is easy, while everything is difficult in Brest. 

As for the construction of a basin, I would like you to give Engineer Cachin the 
commission to go to Saint-Nazaire and Mindin. The small harbor touches the rock of Simeon; 
which would prevent the digging of a basin for three vessels between Saint-Nazaire and the point 
of Penhouet, and even to build a form in the manner of the Dutch engineer, that is to say to 
establish pumps for fire for the water game? Three established forms would give me two ships a 
year. The engineer Cachin can go there from Cherbourg without making an absence of more than 
eight to ten days, and give me the first ideas on this project. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess Decrés, 


18611. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 26, 1812, 


My Cousin, the Ist Division of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, has its headquarters in 
Warsaw, The 2nd Division has its headquarters in Bromberg, the troops occupying Posen, Kulm, 
Thorn and Bromberg, I think that the headquarters of this division must to approach Modlin, and 
the troops to be divided between Plock and Warsaw. The 3rd Division has its headquarters in 
Warsaw, the troops placed on the Vistula, between Warsaw and Pulawy. These three divisions 
must be placed so that they can meet in three days on Praga or Modlin, I suppose that each 
division has its artillery, its cartridges, etc., and is ready to go into campaign, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War.*” 





342 


Page 343 


18612. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 26, 1812. 


My Cousin, if the Russians declared war, the Duke of Reggio would not need to go to 
Stettin, it would be simpler if he passed the Oder at the bridge of Schwedt, which would earn 
him three steps . The movement of the 2nd Corps Park on Schwedt must be operated directly and 
as soon as this park has rested at Brandenburg. 

It must be explained to General Reynier that he must consult Prince Poniatowski on the 
best cantonments to be given to his troops; that he must canton them between Kalisz and the 
Vistula, so as to have outposts at Pulawy on his right, and also within reach of Warsaw that the 
necessity of making his troops live makes it a law for him. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18613. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 26, 1812. 


My Cousin, you will order that the 919 horses of the deck crew who arrive in Magdeburg 
on March 30, April 3, 5 and 8, rest the number of days necessary to recover, harness them carts 
and light carriages of artillery, and then directed on Stettin and thence on Danzig, to arrive 
between the 20th and the 30th of April; so that, from the 20th to the 30th of April, General Eble 
will have at Danzig the companies of pontooners and 900 horses, which will be sufficient for the 
first needs of the deck crew. 

Order that the portion of the general park that was fired from the Ist corps follow this 
body on the Vistula; that that of the 2nd corps remains attached until further notice to the 2nd 
corps, and that the personnel of the crew of the general park, either artillery or engineers, meet 
on the Oder, where it will be returned on April 13, so that both are returned to the Vistula, if 
necessary, at the end of April. Thus the parks of the engineers and the artillery will separate from 
the headquarters and will take a position together between Stettin and Kiistrin, on the side of 
Schwedt. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original, Depot of War. 


343 


Page 344 


18614. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 26, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the Prince of Eckmiihl to send on the spot, on the ground, 50 
thousands of Stettin's powder on Thorn; to send away, by water, 50 thousands of Thorn's powder 
for Modlin; finally, to send from Modlin 50 thousand powder for Zamosc. It is very important 
that Zamosc be abundantly supplied with everything, since this place is most likely to be 
besieged. I had a letter written in Saxony so that 100 thousands of powder for Modlin could be 
sent on the spot. 

Prussia must supply 600 thousand powder; ask that these 600 thousand powder be 
supplied, namely: 100 thousand in Thorn, 200 in Modlin and 300 in Danzig. The 300 thousand 
lead will be divided in the same proportion. 

Write to the general commander-in-chief the artillery to take the necessary measures for 
the dispatch of 300 thousand powder on Danzig, 100 thousand on Thorn and 200 thousand on 
Modlin; and that the different movements of powder of Modlin on Zamosc, Thorn on Modlin 
and Stettin on Thorn, take place without delay. Charge him with information on the time of 
payment of the Thousand Powder to Thorn and Modlin. I suppose the powder that will be poured 
to Modlin will come from Silesia. It is very necessary that this sending be done without delay. 

By this hub, Zamosc, which has 68 thousands of powder, would receive 50 thousand of 
Modlin and be found to have 118 thousand powder; Modlin, which has 100 thousands of 
powder, would receive 100 thousand from Saxony and 200 thousand from Prussia, which would 
make 400 thousand; Thorn, who has 76 thousand powder, would receive 100 thousand from 
Prussia, which would make 176 thousand. It would be necessary that, as soon as the 200 
thousand of Prussia had arrived at Modlin, 80 thousand more would be sent to Zamosc, so that 
there would be 200 thousand powder in Zamosc. But it is urgent that, without wasting time, we 
should direct from Modlin powder to Zarnosc, which will be replaced at Modlin by powder from 
Thorn and powder from Saxony. 

You must write to the Minister of War of the King of Saxony, so that the first convoy of 
100 thousands of powder for Modlin will speak in the first days of April, so that it has arrived in 
Modlin this month. and for it to be sent from the powder*“ 





344 


Page 345 


in Zamosc, because this place is compromised by the little powder in it at this moment. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18615. - TO THE COUNTY COLLIN DE SUSSY, 
MINISTER OF MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE, PARIS. 
Paris. March 27, 1812 


Count de Sussy, the minutes of the meeting of the council of subsistence of the 21st of 
March do not make known to me the situation of things. Ask Count Marot to have the customary 
information, that is, the situation of the purchases, the quantities of flour, the quantities of wheat, 
and the places where all this is, so that I can make a statement. idea of our current situation. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by M. Lefévre, bookseller in Paris, 


18616. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 


MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris. March 28, 1812, 


Monsieur le Duc de Bassano, I send you a report of the Russian army handed over by the 
Prussians. Ask Prince Schwarzenberg to give you the ideas we have here in Vienna. It seems to 
me that by this state there are three more divisions. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18617. - TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Paris. March 28, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, by the last state you have presented to me, I see that we 
must supply another 4,800 horses in France and 8,100 in Hanover, as it seems that Prussia 
executes the delivery of the horses, I would not be not far from employing the Grand Army only 
what would be provided on April 15, or en route, on the 4,800 horses bought in France. The 
surplus would be provided in Berlin, where the men would walk with their stools. The rest of the 
contracts awarded in France could continue to receive” 


345 


Page 346 


its execution, but the horses which would come from it would be destined for the army of Spain. 
Give me a report on that. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18618. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
Paris. March 28, 1812. 


My Son, I receive the organization of the troops that remain in the interior of Italy, in 
accordance with the instruction I have given you. 

The Ist division will be composed of General Schilt's brigade, four battalions of the 13th 
line with two pieces of artillery, which will meet at Udine, and a brigade commanded by General 
Zucchi, meeting at Padua, composed of six Italian battalions and four pieces of artillery; which 
forms a division of ten battalions, six regimental artillery pieces, four squadrons, and six pieces 
of horse artillery, with a force of nearly 8,000 men. I will immediately name a general of 
division. 

The 2nd division will be commanded by General Barbou. It will be composed of the 
Renard Brigade, which meets at Ancona, having two pieces of artillery, a squadron of chasseurs 
and a squadron of dragoons, and forming 2,000 men of infantry and 400 horses. The 2nd Brigade 
will be composed of two battalions of the 112th, which are still at Florence, and which will 
receive orders to go to Bologna; which will bring this division to 4,000 men. There will be 
attached a battery of six pieces of artillery, served by an Italian artillery company on foot. 

Independently of these two divisions, there will be the observation corps of southern 
Italy, commanded by General Grenier, stationed at Perugia, in a situation of being on Ancona, 
Livorno, and Naples, according to the circumstances. 

The Ist and 2nd divisions will, according to circumstances, be carried on Venice, the 
Illyrian provinces, the Tyrol, Ancona, Livorno, and Genoa. There will therefore be in Italy an 
active force of 20,000 men, which may be carried wherever it may be, without understanding 
what would be in Piedmont. 

I approve of the composition of the garrisons of Palmanova, Osoppo, Venice, Mantua, 
Legnago, Peschiera, Rocca d'Anfo, and Verona Castle. It is necessary that you take all the 
measures to complete the frameworks of the*”® 





346 


Page 347 


Italian corps; French executives will be. Whole artillery companies at Palmanova, Venice, 
Mantua, will be available. 

Arrange everything to give things that direction; accelerate the totality of the deposits and 
the rise of the 5 squadrons, in order to have, this summer, 1,500 available horses. 

I suppose that everything that has to leave for the Grand Army is already gone. 

It is necessary that you consult with the Bavarians to know the quantity of troops which 
they will leave in Tyrol. It is proper to leave some troops at Trent. A column of infantry, with 
some cavalry, and six pieces of cannon, are indispensable to keep watch over the whole of the 
Italian Tyrol, to smother all movement at once, and to maintain tranquility. 

General Vignolle will remain in Italy as chief of staff; I will appoint a general to 
command. 

As for the civil government, I imagine that it will be the same as at the time of the 
campaign of Vienna; you will leave the Duke of Lodi the presidency of the Council of Ministers; 
I suppose he is in a position to act. 

Prepare everything for your departure, for in three or four days I will write to you to 
come to Paris, and perhaps from Paris you will go directly to Glogau, and from there to your 
army corps. 

I do not want to let you know that I have for several months concluded an alliance with 
Austria, which is a common cause with me, and provides me with a contingent of 40,000 men. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S, A, I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18619. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Paris. March 29, 1812, 


The Duke of Bassano, it is necessary to write to my ministers in Bavaria, Wurtemberg 
and Baden, to let them know that I wish these three princes to have contingents in the interior of 
their states to rescue each other, in case of insurrection in some of their provinces, 

Write also to my minister in Switzerland I wish that Switzerland enters this confederation 
and that it has a corps of 4 to 5,000 men available to contain Tyrol and Vorarlberg, **’ 





347 


Page 348 


in case of movement on this side, jointly with Bavaria, Wurtemberg and Baden, and the troops 
who will leave Italy. 

My ministers will know this whole; for if the Tyrol was agitated, while a corps would 
leave Trent, a Bavarian corps would march through Innsbruck, a Wurtemberger corps would 
attack Vorarlberg, and a corps would leave Switzerland. A French reserve division itself will 
meet in Strasbourg; I will determine its strength after the different princes have made known 
what they will have available. You will be careful to add that I have no reason to fear anything 
from the Tyrol, since Austria is with us; but that all precautions must be taken, and that it is 
necessary to have a well-connected system, in order not to be caught off guard, 

It should also be written to my ministers and charge d'affaires near the courts of Saxony, 
Westphalia and Hesse-Darmstadt, to know the forces that will remain in these countries and the 
help that these princes could reciprocally send at the request of one of them, in case of 
insurrection, You will also let them know that these measures are pure precaution; that Denmark 
enters my system and supplies, in case of descent of the English, a body of 10,000 men, 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18620. TO THE MOLLIEN COUNCIL, MINISTER OF PUBLIC TREASURY, IN PARIS, 
Paris, March 29, 1812. 


Count Mollien, I have granted, a month ago, a million for the loan of Saxony; however, 
this long-awaited million had not yet arrived on March 16 in Warsaw. Give me a report on that. 

Tell me the state of the funds you have made to pay for the return of the Hanover depot. 
the state of the funds which you have made at Gdansk to pay the budget of nine millions in 1811, 
the state of the funds which you have made at Danzig for the 500,000 francs a month in 
February, March and April, for the service of the administration of the war, the state of the funds 
that you have made for the service of the month of April of the Grand Army, the arrangements 
you have made to provide the millions I took in the loan of the Saxony, finally, the state of the 
funds which you have made to pay the part of the Polish army which I took in my pay by the 
treaty concluded last month. 


The day the funds will be paid must be specified.*“* 


348 


Page 349 


We are in a precious moment where the funds are missing nowhere. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18621. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 29, 1812. 


Cousin, inform the Duke of Ragusa of the news we receive from General Thouvenot, and 
let him understand that this is the fatal effect of the occupation of Asturias by the insurgents. 
Report to me on the increase of the bands which, from Asturias and Galicia, flood the 
rear of the army. 
See if the couriers that were intercepted did not carry important letters from you. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18622. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 30, 1812. 


Cousin, let Prince Eckmiihl know that I suppose the Russians will be careful not to make 
any movement; that they can not ignore that Prussia, Austria, and probably Sweden are with me; 
that, hostilities recommencing in Turkey, the Turks will make new efforts; that the Sultan 
himself is going to surrender to the army, and that all this seems likely to prevent them from 
braving me easily; that I think that on Ist April the 1st Army Corps, with six divisions of 
infantry, and the Ist Corps of Cavalry will be between Thorn and Danzig, occupying Marienburg 
and Marienwerder, having for vanguard the Prussian corps occupying Pillau. and having 
detachments on their borders; that at the same time the Westphalians, Saxons and Poles will be 
near Warsaw. and the Bavarians at Posen; that the Verdier division and a division of the Guard 
will be at Stettin; that the 3rd Army Corps, with the 2nd Cavalry Corps, will be at Frankfort-on- 
the-Oder; finally that the body of Italy will be at Glogau. If the Busses do not make any 
movement, my intention is to spend the whole month of April, contenting myself with working 
with the greatest activity to raise the head of the bridge of Marienburg and to arm it; to fortify the 
Marienwerder Bridge,” 


349 


Page 350 


attaching it to pilots and not just anchors; to have good bridges in Marienburg and Dirschau; to 
establish a good bridgehead at Dirschau on the right bank of the Vistula, on the island of Nogat, 
is to serve as a retreat for the army, in case it retreats to Danzig; to occupy the extremity of the 
Nehrung, opposite Pillau; to supply Thorn's store; to grind as much flour as possible in Gdansk; 
to prepare boats to embark from 50 to 60,000 quintals of flour; to prepare boats to take on the 
entire siege crew, and finally to prepare the deck crew; the horses will arrive in the course of 
April to harness it. 

The Prince of Eckmiihl will place his reserve park near Dirschau on the island of Nogat. 
He will concentrate department stores in Pillau. Prince Poniatowski will bring together 
department stores in Zamosc and especially in Modlin. 

The prince of Eckmiihl will gradually approach his right Marienwerder, since the corps of 
the Duke of Elchingen must be on Thorn. In order not to alarm the Russians, he will not make 
any reconnaissance on the right bank of the Vistula, more than two leagues from Elbing, 
Marienburg, Marienwerder, Kulm, Thorn; but the Prussians, who will make reports to him, will 
serve him to form stores at Osterode and in any other position. 

You will inform the Prince of Eckmiihl that it is probable that on the 15th of April I will 
order the 2nd corps of cavalry, which is at Frankfort-on-the-Oder, to go on Thorn; and on the 
20th of April, at the 3rd corps, to go to Thorn, and to the Bavarians to go to Plock. The Army of 
Italy will also be on Plock. This will be the line of battle of the army at the moment of 
debouching, namely: the 1st corps at Elbing, at Marienburg, at Marienwerdor: the 2nd corps at 
Danzig; the 3rd corps at Thorn; the 4th corps and the Bavarians, under the viceroy's orders, at 
Plock, the Westphalians, the Saxons, the Poles, and a division of Prussians at Warsaw; the 
Austrians, pressing on the Vistula, on the extreme right; the headquarters and the Guard at Posen. 
It is necessary that the Prince of Eckmiihl make shops in Posen, Plock, Warsaw, Pulawy, 
Marienwerder, Marienburg, Elbing: that, besides, he should not make known his plans for 
movement to any one; that, on the contrary, he announces that he will carry his headquarters to 
Warsaw; that if the Russians do not move, he goes to Danzig to inspect everything. By the date 
of the orders I gave him, he will see that it will be only on the Ist of May that my army will be 
thus in battle on the Vistula. Besides, he must make no movement except he has received the 
order. Mandez him*”’ 





350 


Page 351 


that this is to prevent it, so that it can make its provisions accordingly. 

Recommend him to bring to him the 14th and 16th battalions of Comtois wagons and the 
20th battalion of ox-carriages, which he has been ordered to organize. The battalions of Comtois 
wagons removing 600 wagons, the two battalions will form 1,200 cars, carrying 12,000 quintals. 
The loading of oxcars being 20 quintals, the 20th battalion will carry 6,000 quintals; finally the 
240 wagons of the 12th battalion will carry 4,800 quintals, which will make 22,000 quintals of 
flour, or nearly 2 million rations of food supplying food of 100,000 men for twenty days. I 
expect that on the 1st of May these three battalions will be ready, and that the prince of Eckmiihl 
will be able to leave Elbing, Marienburg, Marienwerder, and Thorn, with twenty days of food on 
the carriages and four days in the sack. It is advisable that the food be in flour, because the ovens 
are always fairly quickly built, and because it is the least compact. Until Niemen, the prince of 
Eckmithl will make his corps live with the resources of the country, because the consumption of 
these provisions must begin only after the passage of the Niemen. Let them take some 
information to know if the ovens I built in Oslerode still exist. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18623. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 31, 1812, 


Cousin, I send you the letter of the Prussian general Yorck, have it made to the Prince of 
Eckmihl by reiterating the order to him, not to occupy Memel, since the fort is not occupyable, 
but to occupy strongly Pillau and to ensure that in no case there is any danger to this place. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18624. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March 31, 1812, 


My Cousin, the Mainz route to Berlin by Magdeburg is twenty days*”! 





351 


Page 352 


If, from Eisenach, the road was headed by Leipzig and Wittenberg, one would have only 
seventeen days walk and three stays, in all twenty days; it would be three days of spared. These 
two roads must be drawn; the Magdeburg would be too tired, and for all that goes to Berlin, 
Wittenberg's roll seems more suitable. It must however be ascertained whether from Wittenberg 
to Berlin and to Lutterbock the road is practicable, in order to avoid Potsdam. Besides, as there 
are really no roads in this country, there can be little obstacle to pass either to the right or to the 
left of Potsdam; there will be at most a few mending bridges and some hedges to be felled. I 
want you to draw these roads on a map, as well as that of Wesel in Berlin by Magdeburg, that of 
Hamburg to Stettin, that of Mainz to Dresden by Wiirzburg (it is necessary to know if that by 
Baireuth and Hoff is better than that by Kronach, and tracing the best), that of Strasbourg at 
Dresden, of Siettin at Danzig, of Stettin at Mariemverder, of Berlin at Thorn, of Schwedt and 
Schneidemiihl, of Berlin at Kiistrin, of Berlin at Frankfurt, of Glogau at Posen, of Dresden, Po 
sen by Glogau, from Dresden to Warsaw by Kalisz, from Dresden to Plock on the Vistula by 
Glogau, Have me set out on these well-marked routes the distances; Have them indicate what 
kind of leagues are spoken of, how many fathoms they have. Have the population of the 
milestone towns marked, and in the margin of the map, information taken in the last war, so that 
this map can be used for all operations. You will draw the Magdeburg canal at Kiistrin and 
Bromberg on the same map, the time required for navigation, the lateral communications, and 
the kind of obstacles you may experience. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18625, - TO VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
Paris, March, 1812. (1) 


Count Decres, let me know the number of French officers who are in England, and the 
number of English officers who are in France. I have 7,000 Spanish officers, perhaps it would be 
advisable, if I have an equal number of officers in England, to propose to the Transport Office to 
make the arrangement for the officers 





1) The minute does not bear the date of the day.*” 





352 


Page 353 


did not want to accept for the soldiers, that is to say to exchange 1,000 French officers against a 
part of English and a part of Spaniards. That would have the advantage of saving millions and 
making me good officers who groan in prisons; it would be advantageous to the English, since it 
would be men they could dispose of, and it seems that they fear something of our prisoners, who 
would be much less to fear when they have no more officers. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18626. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 2, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the cohorts of National Guards will be recruited as follows: 

The Ist Brigade, composed of the 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th cohorts, will be destined 
to form a central reserve at Versailles; the 2nd, composed of the cohorts of the 17th, 31st and 
25th military divisions, will be destined for the defense of Holland; the 3rd, composed of cohorts 
of the 24th and 3rd Military Divisions, is destined to meet at Bruges; the 4th, composed of the 
cohorts of the 16th military division, will meet in Antwerp, the 5th, composed of the cohorts of 
the 15th and 26th military divisions, will meet at Boulogne, the 6th, composed of the cohorts of 
the 14th and 21st military divisions. will meet at Cherbourg; the 7th, composed of the cohorts of 
the 13th and 4th military divisions, will meet at Pontivy; the 8th, composed of the cohorts of the 
12th and 20th military divisions, will meet at La Rochelle; the 9th, composed of the cohorts of 
the 2nd and 22nd military divisions, will meet at Le Havre; the 10th, composed of the cohorts of 
the 18th and 5th military divisions, will meet at Utrecht, the 11th composed of the cohorts of the 
6th and 19th military divisions, will meet at Antwerp, the 12th, composed of the cohorts of the 
7th and 8th military divisions, will meet at Toulon, the 13th, composed of cohorts of 9th, 10th 
and 11th military divisions, will meet at Périgueux and serve for the defense of the Pyrenees, the 
14th, composed of the cohorts of the 27th and 28th military divisions, will meet in Genoa. 

The 2nd, 7th and 86th cohorts will not be recruited. 

I send you this work by anticipation, so that you can prepare the choice of brigade 
generals to take in each military division, to command these brigades. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 





353 


Page 354 


18627. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 2, 1812. 


Cousin, I have many requests from young men of twenty-five or thirty who are too old to 
join the army as sub-lieutenants, but who wish to serve; which gives me the idea of forming 
companies of gendarmes of prescription. I would give the command to men like Count Mathan, 
who have served and who have fortune. Propose me a draft regulation for the formation of these 
companies. What would be their uniform, their armament and clothing, their pay? We would 
make light troops. I would first train four companies, and go to ten or twelve if there were any 
subjects. There would be no first bet; they would equip themselves at their expense. What has 
been done for the lifting of the hussars and gendarmes of prescription, both during the campaign 
of Marengo and in the campaign of Prussia? 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria, 


18628. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 2, 1812. 


My Cousin, give me the situation of my Guard on the Ist of April. That independently of 
the composition by arm I see there the formation of the division Delaborde, composed of the 4th, 
5th and 6th regiments of voltigeurs and skirmishers, twelve battalions; of the Roguet division, 
composed of the fusiliers, the 1st regiments of voltigeurs and tirailleurs and the regiment of 
flankers, ten battalions; finally, ten battalions of the old Guard. 

You will understand the condition of generals, colonels, majors, artillery attached to each 
corps, engineers, seamen, administrations, & c. You will also join the division Claparéde, which 
will take no number, but which will be called Polish division, and which is composed of the 
regiments of the legion of the Vistula. 

You will give me at the same time a state which will make known to me what is to be 
sent away, and a state of the movement of the Guard from the Ist of April to the Ist of May. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria.** 


354 


Page 355 


18629. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 3, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the three regiments of the Vistula to leave as soon as possible, and 
before the 10th of April, from Sedan, to Dresden by Mainz, Wurzburg, Baireuth, and Hoff. Take 
care that they have their caissons, their clothing, their shoes and all that is necessary for them. 
General Claparede will march at the head of this division. Give him commissioners of wars, 
deputies and administrations, ambulances, etc., who must follow his division. He will also have 
with him his adjutant-commander and two brigadier generals. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original. Deposit of the war. 


18630. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 3, 1812. 


My Cousin, my Guard is composed of the division Delaborde, with twelve battalions; of 
the Roguet division, of ten battalions; from the division of the ten battalions of old Guards 
commanded by General Curial, and from a Polish division commanded by General Claparede, 
from nine to ten battalions. I would not be far from forming two commands, one composed of 
the Delaborde division and the Claparede division, which, with some regiments of cavalry and 
artillery, would make a corps of at least 15,000 men, what would the Duke of Treviso command? 
the other, composed of the Roguet division, which is formed of my riflemen and the Ist 
regiments of skirmishers and voltigeurs, and the division of the ten battalions of my old Guard; 
which, with the reserve of artillery, would form a body of real importance, which could be 
commanded by the Duke of Danzig, who has energy on fire, from the experience of war. He 
asked me; know if he asked for it seriously; First, is he in a position to wage war? Chat with him, 
but do not commit me, because I'm not quite decided. 

I also plan to form a 9th corps, which will be composed of the 12th Division, the 
Daendels Division, and the Prince's Division, which have a force of 30,000 men, 2,000 horses, 
and about 30 pieces of cannon. This corps could be given to the Duke of Bellone, he would need 
commanders of artillery,” _ 





355 


Page: 356 


administrations. In any case, it is necessary to designate a cavalry brigadier general to command 
the cavalry brigade of the Daendels division, which would take a final number. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18631. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saiut-Cloud, April 3, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to General Dessolle, who is in Berlin, to go to Posen to take 
command of greater Poland. He will be responsible for the establishment of the Posen stores and 
the Posen road police in Thorn, Frankfurt-Oder-Posen, Glogilu-Posen and Posen-Plock. He will 
use everywhere the authorities of the country and the commanders of Polish and Prussian arms; 
but he will require all to render him daily accounts, and he will see to it that everything is 
established on a good footing. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war 


18632. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 3, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Marshal Suchet that I deem it necessary for General Reille to go to 
Aragon to take under his command the command of this interesting province. 

My intention is that General Reille leave under the orders of General Maurice Mathieu 
6,000 men of his troops, namely: a French brigade and an Italian brigade and at least 300 horses, 
and that he goes to Aragon with a French brigade and a Italian brigade. General Reille must also 
leave in Catalonia what belongs to the corps garrisoned in Tarragona, Lerida and Barcelona. All 
Catalonia, except Tortosa and Mequinenza, will be under the orders of General Decaen, so that 
there is more together. 

General Reille, placed at Saragossa, will be able to prevent the evil from growing in the 
Araaon, and he will be able to get along with General Maurice Mathieu and with General 
Caffarelli to pursue the brigands in concert. 

Send to the Duke of Ragusa, that his aide-de-camp will make him known to him, I leave 
him carte blanche; that, given the need to centralize*~° 





356 


Page 357 


the service, I entrusted the King of Spain with the command of the armies of Portugal, the South, 
and Valencia to direct them to one and the same purpose; that the occupation of Asturias is the 
greatest economy of troops that can be made, otherwise the scoundrel will fly on San Sebastian 
and on the rear, and it will employ against it six times more people than to occupy Asturias. 

Send to the King of Spain, in numerical terms, that I entrusted to him the political and 
military direction of all the affairs of Spain; that the army Portugal, which is composed of eight 
divisions of infantry, is in charge of holding a division in Asturias, and, as things stand, needs to 
hold two divisions in the North to contain Galicia and northern Portugal; that it would therefore 
have only five and at most six divisions available to help Badajoz; but that, in this case, he may 
dispose of the division of his guard, of the division of dragoons, which, combined with the forces 
which the Duke of Dalmatia will assemble, will put in the case of defeating the operation of the 
English; that perhaps the Duke of Albufera could threaten Alicante and occupy Murcia; that if 
the Duke of Ragusa has turned to Almeida, a place not yet safe from a hand, and has pushed 
parties in all directions, I consider it unlikely that Lord Wellington exposes to see, in seven or 
eight marches, the French enter Lisbon; but that, if, on the contrary, the Duke of Ragusa remains 
in Salamanca, did not organize the war on the Agueda and let General Wellington take the 
initiative or by default of subsistence or by any other local difficulty, he is obliged to follow the 
initiative of the enemy; then he will be able to assemble, the siege of Badajoz undertaken, five or 
six divisions of the Army of Portugal, what is available to the Army of the Center, and, with the 
Army of the South, to be superior of the double to the English army, for the English have not 
more than 25 to 30,000 men and reunite to the Portuguese more than 50,000 men. There is more 
in Spain today than the English army: either it is necessary to take the initiative on it by 
organizing the defense of Salamanca, having a head of bridge on the Agueda and maintaining the 
war in the north of Portugal, follow the enemy, which would take the initiative on him; or, if it is 
not executed, follow the initiative of the enemy and go wherever he goes; then, without 
contradiction, it is necessary that several divisions of the army of Portugal are carried on the 
Tagus, leaving sufficient forces to Salamanca to fortify this important point and to contain the 
North. 

Besides, it seems that the English have 1,500 men in Cartagena, as much in Alicante, 3 or 
4,000 men in Cadiz,*>’ 





357 


Page 358 


30,000 men in Portugal, and, moreover, 20 or 25,000 Portuguese under arms, disciplined. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18633. - TO FRANCOIS II, EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA, 
IN VIENNA. 
St. Cloud, April 3, 1812. 


Dear Brother and dear Father, the letter from your Imperial Majesty, which was given to 
me by the Prince of Schwarzenberg, contains the assurances of a friendship which will always 
be precious to me, and that I dare say deserved by that that I myself carry to your Majesty. To 
multiply and make closer the bonds which attach me to her was one of my most lively and 
constant desires; and it is with real satisfaction that I have seen the relations which were between 
us producing analogous relations between our peoples, and establishing between them a union 
which time, far from being able to weaken it, will only increase. In all that can cement it, your 
Majesty will always find me ready to concur with it, as well as to give it on every occasion 
proofs of the sincere attachment and high consideration with which I am, my dear Brother and 
dear Father, Your Majesty, the good Brother and son-in-law. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by the government of the Emperor of Austria, 


18634. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 4, 1812. 


My Cousin, Adjutant-Major Bourmont, should not be employed at General 
Headquarters; you can place him with the Duke d'Abrantes, who is the one who put him to the 
service. 

Extract from the book titled Napoleon and the Grand Army, by General Gourgaud, 


18635. - TO MARSHAL BESSIERE, DUKE OF ISTRIA, 
COMMANDING THE IMPERIAL GUARD, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 4, 1812. 


My Cousin, let go tomorrow, at night, all that exists of grenadiers and chasseurs on 


horseback in Paris and Versailles, as well as the dragoons and light horses of the Ist and 2nd 
regiments ready to leave.” 


358 


Page 359 


You will leave only 50 chasseurs, the best mounted, who can make a couple of days and join 
their detachment by leaving on the 8th. When the detachment of Spain will arrive on the 12th, 
you will leave all that will remain available from the 2nd of lancers on foot and on horseback. 
Finally, on the 15th, at the latest, all the rest of the Spanish detachment will leave. 
Order Colonel Henry to return anything that would be useless. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by the Duchess of Istria, 


18636. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 6, 1812. 


Cousin, I send you your brother's letters. Answer that cocoa, sugar and coffee are not 
English goods, and should not be burned. What must be burned are the manufactures and 
manufactures of England, and not the commodities. But, as there are no customs in Corsica, 
there is no inconvenience that sugar and coffee enter, without allowing it, but closing the eyes. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18637, - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, April 8, 1812, 


Duke de Feltre, my booklet of the situation of the artillery is of February 1st; I would 
like to have it at the time of the Ist of April, with the number of conscripts that each battalion 
has to receive, and what it has received, the destination given to each battalion for the Grand 
Army, and what was of April Ist. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy, Depot of War, 


18638. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 8, 1812. 


Count de Cessac, I am responding to your report of April 4th. I see that on 1,400 new 
model carts, ordered,*> a 





359 


Page 360 


know, 360 in Antwerp, 80 in Metz, 40 in Strasbourg, 40 in Auxonné, 20 in Delft, 20 in Douai, 10 
in Mainz, 120 in Turin, 40 in Paris, 316 year old park in Sampigny, 40 in the Parc de Plaisance, 
88 in Paris, 196 in the 10th and 11th military divisions, 680 were provided, 150 are in Mainz, 
100 in Verona, and 470 remain to be supplied. 

I want you to have a new caisson model, much lighter than ordinary caisson and designed 
to carry only 20 quintals. However, we should not change the dimensions width and length; as 
far as possible, changes should only consist in lightening the pieces. Then the Sampigny park, 
which still has 140 wagons to go, and the arsenals of marine and land would stop making wagons 
of the old model to make new. There will be three types of wagons: the old model, which is the 
heaviest; the corrected model, which has been lightened from 4 to 5 quintals, and finally the new 
model, which will be lightened more. Henceforth, to agree, it will be necessary to call the 
heaviest model the first model, the model lightened the second model, and the new model the 
third model. 

I ordered that all Italy, either at Turin or at Piacenza, should be sent to Verona, where 
these sails will be used to load all the articles of clothing which the army of Italy must send in 
the course of May. The 150 trolleys that will be available in Mainz will serve the same purpose. 

I see that the 2nd, 9th, 10th and 12th battalions are complete; I see that the 6th battalion 
has only 60 wagons for its first three companies and that 60 are missing: take the 60 that are 
missing from these companies on the 400 of the old model existing at Sampigny; take from this 
number the 200 missing from the 7th battalion; it will therefore use 260 wagons out of the 400 
that exist in Sampigny. Experience alone can prove what should be done in this matter. I am told 
from Italy that we are much more satisfied with the corrected caisson, which I call Model No. 2; 
we will be even more satisfied with the model No. 3, and they offer the advantage of being able 
to better carry the caisson and all kinds of congestion. 

I will have 880 caisson and 680 carts, total 1,560 wagons, and therefore I will be 
complete. I will have more than 100 wagons, models 1 and 2, which will be in Verona and 
directed on Glognu in the course of May with the bundles of the Army of Italy; 60 caissons of 
model No. 3, which will be from Turin to Verona for convoys in July; Finally I will have in 


Mainz 150 trolleys*™ 


360 


Page 361 


Nos. | and 2, which will be used to carry bales of clothing in April and May, and 410 No. 3 
model wagons, from naval arsenals; it will make him 560 cars for clothing convoys. But you will 
still have at Sampigny 4 or 500 old caissons made, or of which the parts have been prepared and 
which can be promptly made. You will also direct them to Mainz, where more than 1,000 
wagons will be assembled to service all the convoys of clothing for April, May, June and July. 
By that time, my ideas will be clearer and I will order new constructions, since it appears that 
many wagons are needed for the service of the clothing effects of the army. It seems to me that 
there would be an advantage, instead of sending the bales on wagons that are unloaded at every 
moment, to place them on wagons cars that belong to me, either caissons or wagons of the 
models Nos. 2 and 3, and not to treat for the teams until Magdeburg. From Magdeburg it would 
be the general steward of the army who would be responsible for bringing them to the Vistula. 
By this means, I will have a great quantity of all kinds of carriages, I shall not be obliged to rush 
up wagons constructions, which are usually ill-suited to the armies, and, supposing that these 
carriages only go as far as Magdeburg and Kiistriu, I shall always have in my rear all the 
catriages necessary to repair the very considerable pearls which will be made in this country, and 
restore this service in full for the following campaign. In summary, it is necessary to raise only 
the caissons of which one has the parts. 

For a long time you have ordered that no longer makes carts 1; most of what has been 
done must be Model No. 2, of which I have received better testimony. Write, for what we owe 
you, that we stop manufacturing, and substitute model No. 2 for model No. 3, much lighter and 
sufficient strength to carry 2 thousand. Send the drawing to the artillery, the navy and Italy, so 
that what remains to be built on this new model. 

Let me know what prevents the battalions to the comtoise and oxen from being ready; are 
they men, harnesses, cars or animals? What we need first are the men, then the harnesses, then 
the animals. By driving them high up, I will find wagons everywhere; I will even find horses; but 
they are French drivers, well organized, who will provide me a good service. 

So I would like all these crews to the comtoise and oxen**! 


361 


Page 362 


could leave in the course of April; otherwise they will be useless; and I would rather leave the 
well-dressed and well-equipped men with the harnesses and what would be at the depots. Before 
they arrive at Danzig, I will have procured the carts and the animals necessary to complete them. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18639. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 8, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Abrantes to distribute the cavalry of the Kellermann 
division, as well as the 6th division of the reserve, in the different points of Silesia, between 
Glogau and Breslau, without, however, exceeding the limit which has been fixed by the 
convention with Prussia. As it is probable that these divisions must, in the event of an event 
affecting Posen, it would be useful, if the country permits and if there is sufficient forage, that, 
without occupying the road, the cantonments should be placed that by a flank march these troops 
could advance rapidly to Posen; that I approve of the party of slowly moving its park; that it must 
be made small days and give stays; that, if the Russians do not make new movements, my 
intention is to allow the army of Italy to rest at Glogau and Silesia, where the country is 
abundant, and so that it may recover; that it is my intention that his headquarters remain at 
Glogau, as well as all his administrations, and that he should place his corps in good 
cantonments, but in such a manner that the first division may soon reach Posen; that the limits 
which must separate its cantonments from those of the Duke of Elchingen are those which 
separate Silesia from the province of Frankfort, that is to say from the Neumarck. Write in this 
regard to the Duke of Elchingen. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18640. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 8, 1812. 


My Cousin, the thirteenth convoy of funds for the army of Spain will be composed of 3 
millions, namely: 600,000 francs for the army>”” 





362 


Page 363 


of the North, 1,600,000 francs for the Army of Portugal, 500,000 francs for the King, and 
300,000 francs for the Army of the Center; total, 3 millions, of which half in drafts and half in 
silver. 

A fourteenth convoy will consist of 2,400,000 francs, namely: 500,000 francs for the 
King, 200,000 francs for the Army of the Center, 500,000 francs for the Army of the North, and 
1,200,000 francs for the Army of Portugal; total, 2,400,000 francs, of which half in drafts and 
half in silver. This convoy will leave eight days after the thirteenth convoy. 

Propose me the composition of a fifteenth convoy, and at the same time give me the 
composition of convoys despatched since 1812. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18641. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 8, 1812. 


My Cousin, you must not give the necessary developments to the orders you give, since 
the Duke d'Abrantes has so misunderstood that you flew him, relating to the march of the 4th 
corps, I did not say to press the head, but to press the tail. It is therefore wrong that he has 
advanced the head, I would have preferred that the head would arrive on the 10th at Glogau, 
instead of arriving on the 7th, because it will be clutter. Have this remark made to this general. 

I suppose you have notified the governor of Glogau the limit of Upper Silesia that my 
troops must not pass. External relations must have made you aware of it. Make it known to the 
Duke of Abrantes, so that in the distribution of his cantonments he does not exceed this limit. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18642. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 9, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, order General Lagrange, Inspector General of the Gendarmerie, to leave 


on the 15th to take command of the 2nd Reserve Division of the Grand Army, composed of the 
four demi-brigades of 


363 


Page 364 


meet in Cologne. This general will correspond with the second majors whom you must 
immediately designate to command these four demi-brigades. He will first go to the 16th 
Military Division, where most of the Grande Armée depots are, to inspect them and expedite 
their departures. 

I suppose you gave orders for the companies of the 5th battalions to be part of the 2nd 
reserve division to go to Cologne. Those on the Rhine will go by water. These demi-brigades 
could be united in Cologne, Bonn, Aachen, and even Dusseldorf. 

I would wish that in the first fifteen days of May this division could cross the Rhine and 
proceed to Magdeburg. Recommend that no man leave unless well armed, well dressed, and well 
equipped, and in good condition. It is better to wait a few more days, if necessary, Each company 
must be 150 men strong, the framework not included, No man should leave if he has not been for 
at least fifteen days in the corps and if has not been dressed for eight days, Take care of the 
organization of these demi-brigades; it is necessary that they have good majors second, 

Make sure that the cadres of the 5th battalions who are to form the sixteen provisional 
demi-brigades are complete. If there were vacant places, it would be necessary to appoint them 
on the spot, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war 


18643, - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 9, 1812. 


Cousin, send to the Prince d'Eckmiihl that, without the redoubts which are in front of 
Pillau, this place could not defend itself for a short time, since there are no shops sheltered from 
the bomb, and that all would be overthrown by the shells: that General Yorck must be consulted 
to find out what men would require to guard these redoubts; that this occupation would be all the 
less inconvenient if these troops should retreat to the fortress, and thence to Danzig, especially 
after the order I gave to occupy the extremity of the Nehrung, vis-a-vis Pillau. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the ware” 





364 


Page 365 


18644. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 10, 1812. 


My Cousin, the 2nd corps will have its first depot at Kiistrin, Consequently, all the men 
who are lame, sickly or in need of rest, who belong to the 6th, 8th and 9th divisions and the 
brigades of light cavalry attached to the 2nd corps, will be led on Kiistrin. The Duke of Reggio 
will appoint an officer to command this deposit. All the battalions destined for the 2nd corps, as 
soon as they receive orders to leave Magdeburg, will march on Kiistrin. The 3rd Corps deposit 
will also be placed in Kiistrin. The Duke of Elchingen will form his depot of all the broken men, 
etc., and have them directed on Kiistrin. The deposit of the 4th corps will be placed in Glogau. 
The Duke of Abrantes will form there his depot of all the men who have been wounded and out 
of hospitals, and will direct them to Glogau, as well as the battalions for the 4th corps. It will be 
necessary for the commissioners of war and the commanders of arms placed on the road to be 
informed of this decision, so that they may direct the men leaving the hospitals and the battalions 
of march on their respective depots. 

The army will have second depots on the Vistula, namely, the Ist Corps at Danzig, the 
2nd Corps at Marienburg, the 3rd Corps, and the 4th at Thorn. But you will first know only what 
is relative to the 1st Corps; for the other Corps, you will wait until they have unmasked their 
movement and they have received the order to go to the Vistula. There will be two cavalry 
depots on the Oder, namely, Berlin and Glogau. General Guiton will command the Berlin depot. 
There will be two deposits on the Vistula, namely, one in Marienburg and the other in Warsaw. 
Introduce me commanders for the last three deposits. 

The Bavarians will have a depot at Glogau, and all that will be directed on this Corps will 
pass to Glogau. The Saxons will have no deposit on the Oder, any more than the WeslIphalians. 
The deposit of the Wiirttemberg will be at Kiistrin, On the Vistula, the deposit of the Poles and 
the depots of the Saxons and Westphalians will be at Modlin, The depot of the Wiirttemberg will 
be placed in the same place as that of the 3rd corps. The deposit of the Bavarians will be placed 
at the same place as the deposit of the 4th corps. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war. 


365 


Page 366 


18645. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 10, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Danzig, who is at Mayence, that, according to the desire he 
has shown me, I have given him the command of the division of my old Guard; that it is 
therefore necessary that he should send his horses and his baggage to Dresden without delay; that 
he take his aides-de-camp, and that he may be returned to Dresden at the same time that he will 
be there, that is to say, from the 20th to the 25th of April. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18646. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
A KALISZ. 
Saint Cloud. April 10, 1812. 


Brother, I receive your letter by which you inform me that you are leaving and that you 
will have returned to Kalisz on the 12th. If, upon your arrival, there is nothing new, if, having 
established your quota, and having provided for all that is relative to the supply, there is nothing 
to suggest that the Russians are attacking, you could go, very incognito and as if to make a 
military reconnaissance, at Krakow and Sandomir. The local knowledge that one takes oneself is 
always very precious. You can even visit the mines of Wieliczka. If you make this race; which 
has no other purpose than your instruction, try to keep the incognito well, and that you do not 
know that it is only after you have left. You will visit the citadel of Krakow, and you will 
recognize the different situations of the river. You might also have an officer in Warsaw who 
could come to warn you quickly in Krakow if there was anything new, at the same time as he 
would send the order to your contingent to start. By the way, I guess this race will be short. My 
Guard is completely gone. I do not think the Russians make any move. The last news of 
Petersburg, of the 29th of March, showed that they were set in motion, but that they always 
protested that they did not want to attack. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy comm. by S.A. I. Prince Jerome.*” 


366 


Page 367 


18647. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 12, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the garrison of the Saint-Marcouf Islands is accustomed to lodge out of 
the tower, some in a blockhouse, the others in barracks. My intention is that you give the most 
precise orders so that from May Ist the commander, the officers, the soldiers, the employees, the 
stores, the artillery, the enginers, all be enclosed in the tower, which will be closed at night, and 
It will open only after the sun has risen and with the usual precautions, so that it is safe from a 
surprise. The tower can be armed with forty pieces of cannon; there are only twenty-two. There 
are, however, in the Saint-Marcouf Islands forty-five guns. Would it not be proper to enclose the 
most liable in the tower? All powders must be in the casemates of the tower. Let me know if it 
would be appropriate to reduce the defense of the island in defense of the tower. This tower can 
not be attacked regularly; she can only be surprised. The buildings and works on Island of Large 
could be razed and the cuttings used to form a glaze that would envelop the tower. This glacis 
would be separated by a wide moat. In this ditch flanks would be obtained by means of 
crenellated and vaulted double caponiers. The counterscarp would be made of dry stones. To the 
east one could establish a covered way. What should we do with the island of Earth? Would not 
a simple little battery be enough, and would it not be appropriate to destroy everything else? 
Give me a report on that. On May Ist have the semaphore established in the tower; it has been 
unreasonably placed in the island of Large. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18648. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 12, 1812. 


My Cousin, you must have had communication of the treaty with Prussia. There is no 
question of Spandau or Pillau, having declared that I could not help but occupy these two 
positions. 

As for Graudenz and Kolberg, who did not need these places, I did, however, stipulate 
that they would send me the situation reports, and that I would put artillery and engineering 
officers there to have them made.*°” 





367 


Page: 368 


ammunition, and be well informed of everything that happens in the place. 

Accordingly, order the artillery commander to put an artillery company at Spandau, and 
the Duke of Reggio to put an infantry battalion, not in the citadel, but in the city, as I ordered. 
Write at the same time to my aide-de-camp Narbonne. I desire that the king should have at 
Spandau only a commander and about fifty invalids. It is important that Iam master of Spandau, 
which is the citadel of Berlin and which intercepts communications with that city. 

As for Pillau, it is necessary that there should be a Prussian garniture. Make the spirit of 
the treaty known to Prince Eckmihl. My intention is to put a French garrison at Pillau, when my 
troops have passed Konigsberg, leaving in this place a Prussian commander and some invalids, 
and the Prussian flag. Pillau is the citadel of Konigsberg, as Spandau is the citadel of Berlin. You 
will instruct the Prince of Eckmiihl, to keep an intelligent artillery officer and ship-owner, who 
will report every day. 

Send to Prince Eckmihl that I do not know what he means by the line of demarcation 
proposed by General Tauenzien. There must be at Kolberg 4,000 Prussians in garrison; but I 
must receive the states of situation of this place, and have officers of artillery and engineers who 
inform me of what is happening. Order three intelligent naval officers, from the rank of ensign, 
to go to Kolberg. Put a staff officer of the rank of captain and an artillery officer of the rank of 
lieutenant. These five officers will settle at Kolberg. They will render daily accounts of the 
movements of the place and of all matters of service to the governors of Danzig and Stettin. 

Order the Prince of Eckmiihl to send an artillery officer to Graudenz to inform him of 
what is going on. Write to the Prussian commander of Graudenz that having connected with the 
prince of Eckmiihl the command of the league of the Vistula, from Thorn to Danzig, it is 
necessary that he sends him the stalls of situation of his place, You will send your letters to the 
Duke of Reggio and the commanders of Kolberg and Graudenz to my aide-de-camp Nurbonne, 
who will explain it with Count Saint-Marsan and M. de Hardenberg, I want to have in Spandau 
an artillery company French, a French officer of the rank of captain, who will not take the title of 
commander of the fortress, but who will be intelligent,* ae 


368 


Page 369 


alert, who will observe everything and will ensure that the stores that are in the city can serve for 
my administration. There will also be a Prussian commander, a Prussian garrison, who will not 
go over more than 80 invalids, and the Prussian flag will float on the place as belonging to 
Prussia. There will be in the city an infantry battalion and a field artillery battery, so that I can 
consider myself fully master of the place, my intention being, when the war will be declared, to 
put garrison in the fortress Spandau, supply it and arm it; but it is useless to say anything about 
it. Confine yourself for the moment to write that I need to be informed of all that is happening at 
Kolberg and Pillau, these places being near the sea; that this necessitated the dispatch of three 
naval officers to Kolberg, and officers of artillery and engineering; that I want to facilitate 
communication. It is necessary to send to the squares wise officers, well brought up, having a 
good language, and who do not attempt to boast; they must be polite and content to observe and 
report. You will write to the Prussian governors of Graudenz, Pillau, almost in these terms, that, 
the intention of the king being that these places be under the orders of the staff of the French 
army, and that the states of The situation of the garrison and the stores is to be sent, and the 
Emperor having confided the command of the Vistula to the Prince of Eckmiihl, it is to him that 
these governors must address themselves. You will write to that of Kolberg that he addresses 
them directly to you. Write to Count Narbonné to find out what is related to the location of the 
Prussian troops, which must be composed of 40,000 men, that is, of 20,000 men forming the 
active contingent, of 3,000 men in garrison at Graudenz, of 4,000 men garrison at Kolberg, of 
1,800 men at Potsdam, of 10,000 men in Silesia. I want to know where these troops are today 
and where they are. In general, it is necessary that you send a copy of the treaty to Count 
Narbonne, whom I consider to be acting as my commissioner for the execution of this treaty. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18649. - TO THE PRINCE OF NECCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 12, 1812. 


Cousin, I see by the letter of the Prussian colonel Hake, in’® 


369 


Page 370 


on the 2nd of April there will be assembled at Konigsberg ten battalions of infantry, fourteen 
squadrons of cavalry, and sixty pieces of cannon; and at Breslau eight battalions of infantry and 
ten squadrons of cavalry. If I had foreseen that the crews of these battalions should be at 
Konigsberg, I should have sent them to Koenigsberg. 

My intention is that the division of Breslau should have a general of division to command 
it, and that, if the Russians were to begin the hostilities, she could march on her way to the 
Vistula. If, on the contrary, the Russians do not move, this division will have time to form at 
Breslau. Independently of the four pieces of 12, I would like to be given to this division at 
Breslau a battery of horse artillery and two artillery batteries on foot, which would return to 
Silesia when the junction of this division would have taken place with that from Konigsberg. But 
it is likely that this meeting will be done after some military event. It would be proper, therefore, 
for this division to have artillery for its defense. The ten squadrons of cavalry will undoubtedly 
be under the orders of a general. Ask the situation of this division, its strength in men and horses, 
and the names of the colonels and officers. 

See also M. de Krusemark, and show him the letter of Colonel Hake, so that he writes on 
his side and gives clarifications. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18650. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, AT MILAN. 
St. Cloud, April 14, 1812. 


My son, organize Italy as you did for your absence during the last campaign, either by 
instructing Melzi to preside over the ministers, or by taking any other measure which will appear 
to you more useful. Make the service for May and June, and then go to Paris as soon as possible. 
You will remain there for three or four days, during which, after hearing you, I will make 
definite arrangements for Italy; and from there you will go diligently to Glogau to rejoin your 
army corps. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg.*”” 





370 


Page 371. 


18651. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 15, 1812. 


Cousin, send to the Prince d'Eckmiihl, whom I suppose he had assembled the Hessian and 
Baden battalions which were at Danzig with the 7th Division, and which form part of his army 
corps; that he has assembled the 4th battalions of the 5th, 10th, and 11th Polish regiments in the 
7th Division, and that he has formed from this division at least three brigades. 

Tell the Prince of Eckmiihl not to leave his divisions for a long time at Danzig, so as not 
to exhaust this city. Send him to bring them to Elbing's side. With the Prussians, the prince of 
Eckmiihl is thus to have seven divisions of infantry. Let him know that I will shortly order the 
Duke of Reggio to go to Marienwerder; to the Duke of Elchingen to go to Thorn; that, if there is 
nothing new, he orders General Saint-Cyr to go to Plock with the Bavarian corps, operating his 
movement from the 20th to the 26th. Arrived at Plock, General Saint-Cyr will confine his troops 
at one or two days from this town, he will have a bridge over the Vistula at Plock, and will have 
shops there. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18652, - TO LORD CASTLEREAG, 
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, LONDON (1). 
Paris, April 17, 1812. 


Sir, the Emperor and King, always animated by the same sentiments of moderation and 
peace, wished to make an authentic and solemn step again to put an end to the misfortunes of 
war. The greatness and force of the circumstances in which the world finds itself today determine 
His Majesty; he authorizes me, sir, to speak to you of his disposition and views. 

Many changes have taken place in Europe for the last ten years; they have been the 
necessary consequence of the war which had begun between France and England; many changes 
will happen again, and they will result from the same cause. The peculiar character of the war 
may add to the extent and duration of these results. Exclusive and arbitrary principles can only 
be 





1) This letter was dictated by the Emperor of Bassano.*”! 


371 


Page 372 


an opposition without measure and without term, and the system of preservation and resistance 
must have the same character of universality, perseverance and vigor. 

The peace of Amiens, if it had been maintained, would have prevented many upheavals. I 
renew the wish that the experience of the past is not lost for the future. 

His Majesty has often stopped at the prospect of the most certain triumphs, and has 
turned his gaze away to invoke peace. In 1805, confident as he was of the advantages of his 
position, and some confidence that he owed to omens that fortune was soon to realize, he made 
proposals to the British H.M. government, which were evaded on the ground that the Russia had 
to be consulted. In 1808, new proposals were made, in concert with Russia: England asserted the 
necessity of an intervention which could only be the result of the negotiation itself. 

In 1810, His Majesty, being unable to conceal himself any longer than the decisions of 
the British Council of 1807, made the conduct of the war incompatible with the independence of 
Holland, authorized indirect overtures which also tended to peace. no effect, and new provinces 
had to be united to the Empire. 

The present moment brings together all the circumstances of the various epochs in which 
His Majesty showed the pacific sentiments which she commands me to manifest to-day. 

The calamities which afflict the Peninsula and the vast lands of Spanish America must 
excite the interest of all nations and animate them with equal solicitude to see them cease. 

I will express myself, Sir, in a manner which Your Excellency will find in accordance 
with the frankness of the step I am charged to make, and nothing will show better in it the 
grandeur and loyalty than the precise terms of the language which it I am allowed to hold. In 
what views and for what motives would I form myself in forms which are only suitable for 
weakness, which alone is the interest to deceive? 

The affairs of the Peninsula and the Two Sicilies are the disputes which seem most 
difficult to reconcile; I am authorized to propose that you set it up on the following bases: 

The integrity of Spain would be guaranteed; France would renounce any extension of its 
limits on the side of the Pyrenees; the present dynasty would be declared independent, and Spain 
governed by a national constitution of the Cortes.*”” 





372 


Page 373 


The independence and integrity of Portugal would also be guaranteed, and the House of 
Braganza would reign. 

The kingdom of Naples would remain with the King of Naples. The kingdom of Sicily 
would be guaranteed at the current House of Sicily. 

As a result of these stipulations, Spain, Portugal and Sicily would be evacuated by the 
French and English troops of land and sea. 

As for the other objects of discussion, they can be negotiated on this basis, that each 
power will keep what the other can not take away from it by the war. 

Such, sir, are the bases of conciliation and reconciliation offered to St. Regent Prince 
Regis. 

The Emperor and King calculate, in this step, neither the advantages nor the losses which 
the war, if prolonged for a long time, can presage to his Empire. It is determined by the sole 
consideration of the interests of humanity and the repose of peoples; and, if this fourth attempt is 
to be unsuccessful, like those which preceded it, France will at least have the consolation of 
thinking that the blood which might yet flow will fall entirely upon England. 

The Minister of External Relations, 
DUKE OF BASSANO. 
According to the minute. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18653, - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, April 18, 1812, 


Duke de Feltre, order General Boguet to leave to lead the movement of the 2nd Division 
of the Guard, composed of the fusiliers brigade, the brigade formed of the Ist regiment of 
voltigeurs and the Ist regiment of tirailleurs, and the flankers regiment; which will make ten 
battalions. The fusiliers brigade is gone today; the flankers regiment leaves tomorrow, 

Order that the brigade composed of the 1st regiment of tirailleurs and the 1“ voltigeurs, 
under the orders of the brigadier general, leave Monday to go to Mainz. The regiment of 
voltigeurs will win a march. You will order that each battalion of each regiment leave a picket of 
the value of a company cadre; which will make four executives, each of whom will receive 800 
conscripts, or 1,200 men in all. These 1,200 men, well dressed.°”3 


373 


Page 374 


well armed and well equipped, will leave when they are in good condition, but at the latest at the 
end of the month. 
NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18654. - TO THE PIRNCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 18, 1812. 


My Cousin, you need few pieces to arm the Marienwerder and Marienburg bridgeheads, 
since the field pieces would help in their defense. We must also take the coins that would be the 
least useful to Danzig. 

Write to Prince Eckmiihl that I have 500,000 quintals of flour or wheat in Gdansk; that I 
can keep 300,000 in the city to serve the army, in case of failure or retreat; that 100,000 quintals 
will follow the army; that I wish him to spare as much as possible the stores of Danzig, those 
being under our hands, we shall always find them; that he arrived in Elbing where he made shops 
and bought a large quantity of flour, as well as at Marienwerder and Marienburg, which I wished 
to have at Thorn 100,000 quintals of flour and wheat; that I see with pleasure that 40,000 
quintals are sent from Kiistrin, that I have asked Prussia to send them to Thorn; that the corps of 
the Duke of Elchingen, who is to go to Thorn, should eat as much as possible of the corn which 
he will find in the neighborhood, for I desire to have at Thorn 30,000 quintals of flour destined to 
follow the army, and 100,000 quintals in store to serve in case of failure; after Danzig and Thorn 
the third store is Marienburg, which I consider a stronghold or at least as safe from a helping 
hand. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18655. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 18, 1812. 


Cousin, send to the Prince d'Eckmiihl that, in return for the four battalions and four 


squadrons which, from Berlin and Frankfort, are going to Konigsberg, General Grawert will 
have a fine division and a great deal of cavalry; that artillery arrived from Memel?”™ 


374 


Page 375 


must arm the redoubt of Pillau, which will correspond perfectly with the one I am building at the 
end of the Nehrung, opposite Pillau; that it is my intention that the Prince of Eckmuhl should not 
cross the Vistula, or at least that his reconnoiter should not pass for a day the right of the Vistula, 
and that he should use the Prussians to enlighten the country; that if the Russians seize Memel 
and the right bank of the Niemen without passing the river, he sends a parliamentarian to inquire 
whether this is a declaration of war, and that, in case the Russian general replies no, but that it is 
a simple military disposition, it agrees with him that one will consider oneself on both sides as at 
peace, on condition that one will not pass the Niemen; that if, on the contrary, the Russians 
began hostilities and march on Warsaw, he makes only the necessary movements to prevent 
Warsaw from being taken; that he is authorized, in this case, to order the Dukes of Elchingen and 
Reggio and General Saint-Cyr to direct their corps on Marienwerder and Thorn; but that I am 
justified in thinking that the Russians will make no movement, except perhaps to seize Memel, 
which, militarily speaking, is a legitimate operation; I say militarily speaking, because, from the 
political point of view, it is an aggression: so my ambassador has the order to leave Petersburg if 
the case happened; but the prince of Eckmihl, who has nothing to do with politics, can consider 
himself at peace with the Russians if they do not pass the Niemen without having declared it 
several days in advance, just as the prince Eckmiihl can make similar arrangements; that on the 
1st of May all my troops will be in motion, and that on the 15th of May all my army will be on 
the Vistula; and as it is possible that at that time I find myself in Posen, I will give the orders 
which the circumstances will require. In any case, I wish the Prince of Eckmihl to compromise 
nothing; that he considers himself master of Konigsberg, since there are Prussians, as master of 
the points which are opposite Grodno, since there is Polish cavalry; let him let calm weather, the 
season of fodder, and centralize my troops; that he must make efforts only to guarantee Warsaw; 
that all the measures which he proposes by his letter of the 6th of April, would only excite the 
Russians to begin the attack; that the work which will be done on the Curische Haff and vis-a-vis 
Memel will be good only when it is decided to go to Konigsberg, that we must be careful not to 
remove the boats which are on the Niemen and do nothing that shows worry; that it is 
necessary” 





375 


Page 376 


otherwise, be peaceful; that I could have advanced some cavalry corps on the Vistula a fortnight 
earlier, had I not feared that they would find no sustenance; instead that, starting May Ist, on 
their arrival on the Vistula on May 15th, the grass will be good, at least, to eat. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18656. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 18, 1812, in the evening. 


Cousin, I send you your different orders, which you can ship tonight, since there is no 
time to lose. I made different corrections. Add to the Dukes of Elchingen, Reggio, Abrantes, and 
General St. Cyr, that this is assuming that the Russians would not have attacked, and that the 
Prince of Eckmiihl, under the pressure of circumstances, would not have sent other orders. Do 
not tell the Duke of Reggio to carry twenty days of food; tell him to wear as much as possible. 

Order General Daendels to surrender himself on May Ist at Stettin, where he will 
assemble the Ist Baden infantry regiment; which, together with the Ist battalion of light infantry 
of Baden and the Ist battalion of the 3rd of the line, will form four battalions of Baden, or 3,000 
men; there will also meet the Baden hussars and the artillery, which will put in his hand a reserve 
of 4,000 men and 400 horses to carry wherever it is necessary. Tell him that there is besides at 
Stettin a battalion of Hesse-Darmstadt (light infantry), a squadron of light-horse from Hesse- 
Darmstadt, and another at Kiistrin; that he places infantry and cavalry stations at the bridge of 
Schwedt and all over the Oder, so that the garrisons of Glogau, Kiistrin and Stettin are 
connected, and that nothing passes on the Oder without being seen and in good standing; that the 
whole contingent of Berg will thus remain in Pomerania; that General Durutte commands at 
Berlin, and that he must have a correspondence with this general; that finally his division is part 
of the 9th corps, of which the Duke of Bellune has the command; that this marshal, who goes to 
Berlin, will make him pass all the orders of circumstance; that he must keep an eye on the 
mouths of the Oder and distribute cavalry pickets in order to secure the whole country. 

Designate a French Brigadier General, of those who are the most*”° 





376 


Page 377 


to take command of Mecklenburg, until General Laplane, whom I have appointed, has arrived 
there. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18657. - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DE LA RIBOISIERE, 
COMMANDING THE ARTILERY OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 18, 1812. 


General Count la Riboisiere, now that you are in Berlin, take information on the 
navigation of Magdeburg in Berlin, from Berlin to the Vistula and Danzig to Niemen, on the 
width of the locks, on the kind of buildings uses, on the unloadings which it is necessary to make 
in a crossing, and on the time which one uses commonly in each transport. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Count de la Riboisiére. 


18658. - SPEECH OF THE EMPEROR 
TO THE DEPUTATION OF MONT-TONNEREE. 
Palace of St. Cloud, April 19, 1812. 


Prelates instituted to pray to God had formed your masters: such an abuse has 
disappeared forever from Europe. The Empire which I founded preserves you forever from 
becoming the theater of war, and places you under uniform laws, equal for all parts of the 
territory. An increase in your agriculture and the development of your industry must have been 
the natural result of this new order of things. I agree with the feelings you express to me. 

Excerpt from the Moniteur of April 20, 1812. 


18659. - TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, 
INTENDANT GENERAL OF THE GOODS OF THE CROWN, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 20, 1812. 


Monsieur le Duke of Cadore, have me draw up the final account of all that will be 
produced, according to the budget, the demolition of the houses of the Louvre. The Baron la 
Bouillerie bore in his account, on March 31, 1812, only 294,000 francs for this object. This sum 
seems to me very small, considering the large number of houses that were demolished on the 
Carrousel and on the grounds of the Louvre. There is nothing worn for the same item in the 
Palais article*”’ 


377 


Page 378 


de Rome. Some houses were also demolished on these lands. Also make the account of the 
proceeds of the sale of the lands of Rivoli and Capucines. It appears that the grounds of the Rue 
de Rivoli are estimated at 3 millions, which, however, only 1,600,000 francs have been 
collected; that those of the Capucines are estimated 1,700,000 francs, that however only 1 
million was perceived. Give me these accounts and take steps to bring in all that remains to be 
collected. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Mr. Louis Barbier. 


18660. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 21, 1812. 


Cousin, write to General Riboisiere that it is necessary for him to direct Kiistrin, and 
Kiistrin on Thorn and Posen, the rifles intended to arm the insurrection. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18661. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 23, 1812. 


My Cousin, you will give the following instructions to the Duke of Bellune. The corps of 
which he will take the command consists of the 12th division or that of General Partouneaux, of 
the 25th division composed of three Polish regiments which were in Andalusia, the 4th, 7th and 
9th; they have now passed Bayonne and are marching for Sedan. That will make a force of more 
than 30,000 men. The 12th Division is running from Wesel on Magdeburg. My intention is to 
unite it at Spandau and Berlin; she will be there in the first half of May. The Daendels division is 
in Mecklenburg, Swedish Pomerania and Stettin. The Polish division can not be in Berlin until 
the end of May. Thus, during the month of May, time necessary for the formation of this corps 
d'armee, it is destined to keep garrison in Berlin and to assure the communications of the army 
and the tranquility of the country. At the beginning of June, three divisions of the reserve, which 
meet at Cologne and Wesel, and which will form about 40,000 men, will take up positions at 
Magdeburg, Berlin, and on the coasts. Then the 9th corps will be*”® 





378 


Page 379 


formed, well organized, and will be on the Vistula to enter online. 

Thus, during the month of May, the Duke of Bellune has no other operation to do than to 
organize his corps to contain Prussia and to supervise the whole country between the Vistula and 
the Rhine. This determined me to decide that he would take his headquarters to Berlin, and to 
place under his command not only the troops of the 9th Corps, but also the garrisons of Stettin, 
Kiistrin, and Glogau, the princely division, whose Ist brigade occupies Hamburg and the second 
Berlin, the Magdeburg garrison and all the remaining troops in the kingdom of Westphalia, as 
well as all the battalions and squadrons of march which will march on Magdeburg and Berlin to 
join the army. 

A precise instruction is necessary for this important mission. It is my intention that the 
Duke de Bellune be returned to Berlin on the 26th or 27th, in order to take this place from the 
Duke of Reggio. You will send him a copy of the treaty made with Prussia, as well as of the 
Convention respecting subsistence, but under the secret, and to put him in a position to 
understand the question. As we advance, we are approaching the war, and we must therefore 
redouble our firmness and vigilance. The Duke of Reggio had only vague instructions to enter 
Berlin; it was then further from the war; but a month has passed since then and brought more 
decisive circumstances. Here are my instructions: 

In accordance with the spirit of the treaty, no general or Prussian officer should command 
Berlin; no Prussian troops must be there; no service should be done there except by order of the 
French general. I entrusted the command of the place of Berlin to General Durutte. He will have 
to scroll through the parade every day, give the password and order the service. The National 
Guard will be able to do the service jointly with my troops. The few men of regular troops who 
have remained in Berlin must be there only for the guard of the palace; still receive the order of 
the French commander. 

Spandau must be considered as the citadel of Berlin. I attach the greatest importance to 
having no worries about this place. It was agreed in the treaty that the King of Prussia would be 
the master of disarming it, and that he would leave there only a company of invalids; but I have 
reserved to occupy it, as well as Pillau, both of them being necessary for the safety of 
communications. I ordered that an artillery company be put in the citadel, and that we would 
use 





379 


Page 380 


stores to contain ammunition. I recommended that one or two battalions should always be 
garrisoned at Spandau, that a commander of arms of the rank of battalion commander should be 
placed there, and that all the battalions or squadrons of march coming from Magdeburg should 
pass by Spaudau, in order to always have 2 or 3,000 men. A brigadier general will be in charge 
of the superior command, and will see to it that the service is done with the greatest exactitude. 
Spandau will be under the orders of Major General Berlin. It will be avoided to keep troops in 
the citadel, except the artillery company I mentioned, until hostilities begin; but at the first shot a 
thousand men will enter the citadel. The Prussian invalids will remain there, the Prussian flag 
will continue to float there. Immediate provision will be made for the formation of a 
headquarters supply for six months; the artillery of the citadel and the place will be supplied, 
and, if necessary, the works in good condition. Up to the moment of the war, one must be 
careful, content to keep the artillery that is there, leave nothing out, admit Prussian troops only 
the company of invalids, and find themselves able to be master of the citadel, without occupying 
it, meanwhile, otherwise than by an artillery company, which will appear to be there only to heal 
the ammunition and prepare artifices. 

One must occupy the arsenal of Berlin, preserving all that is property of the king and 
taking nothing but inventory; but it is important to keep an eye on the fact that there is not in 
Berlin or in the neighborhood any depot of arms, no cannon, which the populace can seize. All 
French stores, both food and war ammunition, must, except for the moment of passage, be 
constantly at Magdeburg, Spandau, and Kustrin. There must be no troops all over Prussia, only 
1,800 men at Potsdam, and 3,000 if the king remains there, 4,000 at Kolberg, 3,000 at Graudenz, 
and 10,000 in Upper Silesia. The command of the Duke of Bellune extends over the part of 
Silesia which we have preserved on Kolberg, all the coast from Kolberg to Hamburg, on 
Pomerania and Mecklenburg, He must receive frequent reports of all these points of the Prussian 
commander of Kolberg and the French officers I established there, of the commander of 
Magdeburg and of the Westphalian Minister of War, in order to be able, in unforeseen cases, to 
know the forces at his disposal and take action depending on the circumstances. The Prussian 
gendarmerie will remain*”” 


380 


Page 381 


alone in the country. No detachment of either Potsdam or Kolberg will be able to enter it except 
at his request. 

You will order the commander of the 32nd Military Division, the Mecklenburg 
Commander, the Prussian commander of Kolberg, and the French officers who have been sent 
there to correspond with the Duke of Bellune, and to instruct him on all matters pertaining to him 
will pass; which must not prevent their ordinary relations with the General Staff. You will write 
in the same sense to the ministers of war of Westphalia and Saxony. 

If a descent took place on the coasts, the Duke de Bellune must be informed of it at once, 
to make all the proper arrangements. You will warn him that the administration of the country 
remains entirely with the agents of the King of Prussia, but that the surveillance of newspapers, 
writings, and all police means must be in his hands, so that nothing gives the people a dangerous 
impulse and that the country has no way to rebel. 

Graudenz's place will be in another system. You will inform the Duke de Bellune that I 
have ordered three or four intelligent officers to enter Kolberg and Graudenz; I reserved the right 
for it by the treaty. You will tell him that it is proper for him to go and see the mouths of the 
Oder, in order to establish batteries where necessary. Part of the Kolberg garrison could be 
established on the coasts to serve concurrently with the French troops; but the real right to keep a 
Prussian garrison is only for Kolberg, as Potsdam is the only city where French troops must not 
pass. 

It is proper, however, to accustom the people of Potsdam to see many French officers, 
and that there are those who often go to sleep there to see the city. If curiosity does not carry 
them enough, it will be necessary to engage them under this pretext. 

The best way to assure the tranquility of Prussia is to put it in the helplessness of making 
a movement, in case a descent comes to take place, or when we lose a battle. 

It seems proper to me that the Duc de Bellune, by accepting a lodging in Berlin, does not 
accept any table and that he represents on the funds which I grant him. His representation must 
be great. It is useless to recommend to him the greatest regard for the princes, the ministers, and 
the principal personages of Berlin, while seizing the police. 

Pry insult to a Frenchman must be judged by a military commission, according to our 
custom. 





381 


Page 382 


The Duke of Bellune will organize his correspondence, as I have just said, with the 
principal officers of his command. The 32nd Military Division is not part of the army for 
administration. The Duke of Bellune must give no order of detail, but be well acquainted with 
the state of things, in order to make the proper arrangements if there were movements to repress 
or descents to repel. 

The Duke of Valmy, who commands the 25th and 26th Military Divisions, will have his 
headquarters in Mainz and Wesel. 

You will give the duke of Bellune a duplicate of the treaty made with the King of 
Denmark, by which it will be learned that this prince must supply a corps of 12,000 men, if 
necessary, to carry either the Zuiderzee or the Oder, and contribute with my troops to repel a 
descent. 

The disposition of the Swedes is not yet known. Meanwhile, the embargo in Pomerania 
and the measures that have been taken must be vigorously implemented. 

The first brigade of the Partouneaux division not being able to reach Magdeburg until the 
8th or 10th of May, it decided me to order the Wurtemberge division to stay in Frankfurt-on-the- 
Oder, and not to go to the Vistula. The Duke de Bellune will only disturb her position in case of 
necessity. Thus, for the first days of May, he will have a brigade of the princely division at 
Berlin; the Daendels division in Mecklenburg, Stettin and Pomerania; the Wiirlemberg division 
at Frankfort-on-the-Oder, and finally the Imperial Guard, which arrives at Dresden. A division of 
the Imperial Guard, commanded by General Roguet, is heading for Berlin; he will arrive there 
around May 15, but only to go there. 

Works have been ordered on the island of Riigen and in Swedish Pomerania. It will take 
the mouths of the Oder. The General of the 32nd Military Division, the Commander of 
Engineering and the Commander of Mecklenburg will be able to make known the main points to 
be fortified on this coast. 

An intelligent warrant officer will be attached to the Berlin government, and will remain 
there when the Duke de Bellune leaves with his corps. 

You will order the Duke de Bellune to communicate this instruction to his successor. It is 
also necessary to organize a police force near the governor general in Berlin, in order to know 
what is going on and to have an eye open on all the activities that might take place. Being thus 
insured of Stettin, Kiistrin, Glogau, Torgau,*” 


382 


Page 383 


Spandau, Saxony, and Magdeburg, with reserve corps, keeping an eye on the fact that there are 
now no arms assemblies, with intelligent officers at Kolberg, and sometimes sending a camp of 
confidence, one will be able to fear nothing of the disloyalty of the Prussians, if, after an 
unfortunate event, they could be excited to go there. 

The French Minister at Berlin, the Count de Saint-Marsan, is a man on whom one can 
count, and who possesses to a high degree the confidence of the Prussians. The governor general 
will have to take care of it and will be able to consult with him safely. The Duke de Bellune will 
in all circumstances have to show the greatest respect for the King and the Prussian Government, 
which must even be carried to the point of assignment in all feasts and circumstances whatever. 

It would be convenient to form a district to the government of Danzig, placing the 
boundary between Danzig and Kolberg. By this means the governor of Danzig would be in a 
position to watch the coast; he could send infantry and cavalry pickets, officers, and receive 
reports. 

Tell me the point at which the command of the Duke of Bellune must finish, and give me 
tomorrow the letter which you will write to the King of Prussia and the Prussian commander at 
Kolberg, as well as the instruction which you will give to the Duke of Bellune according to this 
letter, in which I think I have foreseen everything. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18662. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, April 25, 1812, 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I asked Major General Durutte to order in Berlin. The Marshal 
Duke of Bellune will command all the Prussian provinces; he has already been to Berlin. I have 
made known to you my intention with regard to the places of Spandau and Pillau, which, 
according to the treaty, must be at my disposal, and relative to the places of Kolberg and 
Graudenz, which remain in the hands of the Prussians. I divided the Prussian coast of the Baltic 
into two parts: the first is placed under the supervision of the Duke of Bellune, and the other part, 
that of Danzig, is entrusted to the governor of Danzig, The Prussian governor of Kolberg*®* 





383 


Page 384 


may place on this line all the Prussian posts which he wishes and which he considers useless for 
the defense of his place; but the duke of Bellune and the governor of Danzig may also, as long as 
they have the means, send detachments to do the service concurrently with the Prussians and to 
hear each other; you have to agree. As far as Berlin is concerned, there must be no governor or 
Prussian commander; the service must be done only by the National Guard, in concert with the 
French troops and under the orders of the French commander. Unity is needed in military affairs. 
Moreover, this is in accordance with the treaty. I do not want any complications. There must be 
in Berlin, center of the security of my depots and my rear, only French commanders. You know 
very well that the Prussians had asked nothing for the palace and that it was I who imagined to 
leave them a guard. I desire that the officer who will command there be not of a rank higher than 
that of captain. Write in this direction to M. de Saint-Marsan. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18663. - TO M. MARET, DUKE DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 25, 1812. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, it is fitting that you speak much to M. de Krusernark of the 
command of the Duke of Bellune at Berlin, of the formation of the 9th corps and that of the 10th, 
which will be of 40,000 men, and which will consist of divisions meeting today in Cologne, 
Wesel, etc. These last troops will arrive on the Elbe towards the beginning of June; the divisions 
of the 9th corps will arrive there in the course of May. In talking with him, it is necessary that 
you give substance to his correspondence by making known to him that the hundred cohorts of 
the national guards are already formed, which will put at my disposal 100 battalions, which were 
retained to keep Holland, Boulogne, Cherbourg, Brittany and our coasts. It is good that you write 
something of this to M. de Saint-Marsan, and that you make him aware of the existence of the 
9th and 10th corps. This language is always useful. Write it also to M. Otto, to M. de Mercy at 
Munich, and finally to your principal correspondents, so that it may serve their language. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives.°*™* 


384 


Page 385 


18664. - TO M. MARET, DUC DE BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 25, 1812. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I suppose you have a consul in Kolberg; However, I never receive 
letters from him. I have informed you that it was my intention that there should be a fixed one. 
This negligence is very fatal. Make sure to have a trusty man, who has a number and who writes 
to you every day. I need to have some at Elbing, Konigsberg, Memel, etc. These positions are 
important because they form an intelligence office and they are a valuable link between the 
inhabitants and the French army. You must also have a safe man in Riga, Libau and all along this 
coast. When they are forced to evacuate the country and return, they must stop at the first French 
headquarters, since the knowledge that these men will have of the country will be very useful to 
us. I need consuls more than ever at Rostock, Wismar, Stralsund, and all the different Danish 
ports, in order to have a very active correspondence on what is happening on the sea side one to 
Allona. These men have to write every day. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Archives of Foreign Affairs. 


18665. - TO THE VICE-AMIRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 25, 1812. 


Count Decres, I signed the decree on fishing; but does it apply only to the coasts of 
Holland, or does it extend to all the coasts of France and the Mediterranean? It seems to me that 
everywhere we are calling for fishing, because everywhere it is hindered. These claims are so 
interesting from the point of view of the navy in general, especially in terms of a livelihood 
important to a large part of the population, that they deserve all my solicitude. Let me know the 
barriers that exist on all coasts and the steps to take to lift them. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres.** 


385 


Page 386 


18666. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 25, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, reply to General Molitor, whom I see with pleasure the movement he is 
making to provide for the defense of Holland; that he has nothing to fear at this moment; that the 
English have all their troops in Spain and Portugal; that it is sufficient to keep in the lake of 
Haarlem a single gunboat, so that the officers of the engineers, the artillery; from the staff can 
use this boat, and traverse the lake to learn to know him well; that I attach great importance to 
the completion of the little vaulted guard-house which I have ordered on the lock, so that some 
fifty men who are shut up there may be able to master this important point; that all the 
precautions, besides, are so taken in France, that in a few days he would have 50 or 60,000 men 
advancing to his aid; that he must not take cannon-boats, because they are necessary in the 
Zuiderzee, where the sailors exercise themselves better; that he must ensure that Naarden Fort is 
armed and in good condition; that I wish that, after May 15, he returns to visit forts Lasalle and 
Dugommier, the forts of the island of Texel, the place of Brielle, Hellevoeisluis and the forts of 
the island of Goeree. It is necessary that at the end of May, at the latest, the fort of the island of 
Goeree be armed and in good condition, as well as the forts of Texel and Helder. 

Write to General Chambarlhac that it is necessary that in the last fortnight of May he 
should pass the review of the stores, armaments and defense of the place of Ysendyke, the fort 
Napoleon and the fort Imperial of the island of Cadzand, Walcheren Island, Fort Montebello, 
Fort Saint-Hilaire, Rammekens, Zierikzee and Willemstad; and let him come back to Fort Bath, 
Lillo, and Antwerp. He will report to you every evening what he has seen, both in terms of 
fortifications and siege supplies, and also the situation of the troops. 

NAPOLEON, 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18667. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 25, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Prince Eckmiihl that a Russian officer, **° 


386 


Page 387 


porter of letters of the Emperor of Russia, arrived in Paris on the 14th; that he had left the 8th of 
this month of St. Petersburg; that he is the bearer of different propositions; that it appeared, by 
what Prince Kurakin said after the arrival of this courier, that, if all the French army arrived on 
the Vistula, they had the project of taking the position of the Niemen, and that would negotiate in 
this situation; that the Prince of Eckmihl will be informed by General Lauriston of what will be 
on this object; but that, if the Russians make no other move than that of seizing Memel and the 
right bank, my intention is not to see the hostilities as begun; that on the 15th of May the Dukes 
of Reggio and Elchingen will have arrived on the Vistula, and that the Guard will be reunited at 
Posen; that I even delayed for a few days the movement of the 4th corps on Plock, lest he suffer 
too much from the defect of fodder; that the grass will be good only in the last half of May; that 
it is, therefore, agreeable that no important transaction be required before the first days of June. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18668. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 25, 1812. 


Cousin, I send you the different letters that you can send to the Duke of Bellune. It is 
necessary that you inform the Prussian War Minister of the general of division to which I have 
given the command of Berlin, and the establishment of the Spandau depot to avoid encumbering 
the city of Berlin. It is also necessary that you write to the governor of Kolberg for the part of the 
coast which must be under the orders of the Governor of Danzig. It is also necessary that in a 
letter to the Prussian Minister of War you should inform him that, in your instructions to the 
Duke of Bellune, you have said a word of Kolberg, which must always remain in the hands of 
the Prussian troops. 

As for the journals, you will say that it seems appropriate that the Duke of Bellune should 
have a watch to prevent the insertion of anything contrary to the interest of the French and allied 
armies; just as the king and the Prussian authorities must ensure that they do not print anything 
that disturbs the good order and tranquility of the interior. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war.’ 





387 


Page 388 


18669. - TO ALEXANDER I, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA, 
Saint Cloud. April 25, 1812. 


Brother, having reason to think that your Majesty has left St. Petersburg, and that Count 
Lauriston is no longer near him, I entreat my aide - de - camp, Count Narbonne, with this letter. 
At the same time he will be the bearer of important communications for Count Romanzof. They 
will prove to your Majesty my desire to avoid war and my constancy in the sentiments of Tilsit 
and Erfurt. Your Majesty, however, will allow me to assure you that, if fatality were to make war 
inevitable between us, it would in no way change the sentiments which your Majesty inspired 
me, and which are protected from all vicissitude and alteration. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by the government of His Majesty the Emperor of Russia. 


18670. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 30, 1812. 


Monsieur le Duke de Feltre, I reply to your letter of the 29th. My intention is that we do 
not send any Spaniards, if he does not commit himself, and I do not hear that we want to send 
them to the battalions of war in the hope that they will arrive there. Your letter makes me choose 
to keep, recruited by Spaniards, only the battalion of sappers, the company of workers and the 
battalion of Walcheren. You will see by my letter of this day that I give a job to the other three 
cadres who are on the Rhine, and who are destined to receive Spaniards. 

However, I do not oppose the fact that you carry up to 1,200 men the battalion of 
Walcheren, taking Spaniards of good will, because if this measure succeeded, I would send 
another cadre. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18671. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATIOS OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 30, 1812. 


Monsieur le Comte de Cessac, I have with interest your report on the caissons. Here is 
how I classified them in my memory. The first**® 





388 


Page 389 


model weighs 2,460 pounds; the second improved model, 2,038 pounds; the ordinary box, 1,900 
pounds. The difference between the ordinary box and the second model is therefore only 138 
pounds, which can not be important. 

You present a third model that weighs only 1,640 pounds, 260 pounds lighter than the 
regular caisson. If this cart can carry 20 quintals, it has many advantages. Order that they be 
made at Sampigny, at Plaisance, and that they should be made a model at Danzig, so that the 
builders and officers who are there will make their observations. But it seems to me that this 
third model has the double advantage of carrying as much as the first in objects of size and 
weigh 800 pounds less, while it can carry more space than the caisson. 

I think that the n° 3 is preferable to the n° 3 bis, since it is lighter, more solid and has the 
same capacity as the n° 2. All that remains to build in carts with Danzig, with Plaisance, with 
Sampigny, or whatever the artillery should provide, have it done on this model. 

Give me the state of what exists in caisson of various models. 

In general, it comes back to me that in Italy we were happy with the second model; we 
will be much more of the third model. 

I want the design of the new model no. 3 to be sent by tomorrow's courier to Danzig. 
General Eble, General Lepin and several artillery officers will form a commission to rectify it. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18672. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 30, 1812. 


My cousin, order the division of Wurtemberg to leave from the 5th to the 10th of May to 
join the Duke of Elchingen's corps on Thorn. Instruct the marshal of this order. Write to the 
Duke of Bellune to inform him that on the 10th May the head of the 12th Division arrives at 
Magdeburg; that before this time four or five thousand men of the marching battalions must 
arrive at Spandau; that, if he sees no inconvenience, he orders this division to leave on the 5th; 
but that, if he finds any inconvenience, he may delay his departure; that I wish it to retain no later 
than May 5th the 26th Light, and that it be returned to the corps of the Duke of Reggio, as well 
as the battalion of the 19th and what would be at Spandau, belonging to this corps; that I°*° 


389 


Page 390 


suppose that the marching battalions which have arrived at Berlin are sufficient for the 
guardianship of Spandau and Berlin, as well as the princely brigade, which is to form five 
battalions and more than 3,000 men. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18673. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 30, 1812. 


My cousin, my intention is to give the command of the 10th corps to the Duke of 
Taranto. This 10th corps will be composed, Ist, of the Prussian infantry division, which is, I 
believe, three brigades, forming 14,000 men; a number will be given to this division; 2nd of the 
7th Division, having three brigades and eighteen battalions; 3rd a Prussian cavalry division; 
which is to make from 26 to 28,000 infantry and 3,000 cavalry, with eighty pieces of cannon; in 
all 30 to 32,000 men. Give me the training project of this corps. It is not my intention, however, 
that he should be formed before I myself have arrived on the spot, in order to avoid the 
embarrassment of the command with Prince Eckmiihl. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18674. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 30, 1812. 


Cousin, answer General Narbonne that General Kleist is sufficient to command the five 
battalions, forming 3,600 men, and the six squadrons, forming a thousand horses, which are at 
Breslau; that I think an artillery battery on foot and battery on horseback are sufficient; that I 
wish them to be provided without delay. 

Directly write to General Kleist that, until he can be united with the Prussian army, which 
will be as soon as possible, he must receive the orders of the King of Westphalia. 

Charge General Narbonne with consulting in Berlin to know which corps one prefers to 
see attached to the Kleist brigade, or to the Westphalian corps commanded by General 


Vandamme, or to the Saxons commanded by General Reynier, or to the Poles commanded by?” 


390 


Page 391 


Prince Poniatowski, until she joined the corps of General Grawert; that it is even possible, if the 
Russians do not attack, that the junction of the Kleist Brigade with General Grawert be made 
before the commencement of hostilities. 

Inform the King of Westphalia of the composition of General Kleist's brigade. Send him 
a duplicate of your order, which he will pass to this general to let him know that he is under his 
orders. The King of Westphalia will consequently bring this little Prussian division under his 
command, placing it in such a manner that it does not disturb him for his subsistence. 

NAPOLEON 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18675. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 30, 1812. 


My cousin, my intention is that there be at Erfurt a brigadier general who has the 
supervision of the roll of Mainz to Erfurt and Erfurt to Magdeburg, under the orders of General 
Michaud. My intention is that the citadel of Erfurt be armed; that there be an artillery officer, an 
artillery storekeeper, an engineer officer, and a storekeeper of that weapon, with a garrison 
constantly of at least 500 men lodged in the citadel. Compete with the Minister of War on what 
is needed in artillery and engineering to arm the citadel. The steward will act as commissioner of 
war and form the headquarters supply. The 4th battalions of the 3rd and the 105th will leave 
Strasbourg for Erfurt. These two battalions, strong of 1,500 men, will remain temporarily in this 
place. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18676, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, April 30, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Viceroy to leave for Glogau and be returned there on May 6th. He 
will remain there two days to review the three divisions and the royal guard, which form the 
fourth corps, and he will send you the detailed report, by sending his dispatches by a courier to 
Kiistrin, where the courier passes. The viceroy” 


391 


Page 392 


then on Plock to review the 6th corps. He will write to you frequently by sending letters to 
Posen, where the courier passes. He will speed up the formation of his stores at Plock, and 
prepare everything to keep his army corps on one side and the other. Regardless of his Chief of 
Staff, he will hold close to him for help him General Plauzonne, who is an officer of merit. The 
Viceroy will have under his command the 4th and 6th corps and the 3rd corps of cavalry, which 
will make him nearly 80,000 men. You will let him know the places from which he must draw 
his sustenance; that his right goes up to Modlin; that the King of Westphalia is at Warsaw, 
commanding the Sth, 8th, and 7th corps; that he has on his left the corps of the Duke of 
Elchingen, and further on the Prince of Eckmuhl and the Duke of Reggio; that, until I have 
arrived, he must execute the orders sent to him by the Prince of Eckmiihl, to whom he must hold 
an officer; that the general headquarters are at Posen; that he could push his cavalry posts for 
four or five days from Plock, without, however, doing anything to worry the Busses. Order that 
the 4th Corps begin its movement from the 5th to the 10th (send an extra-ordinary courier to give 
this order), and proceed to Plock. He will arrive there at a time when there will be grass, and 
from then on I will have no more anxiety for the horses. Leaving Glogau he will fill his caissons 
with flour and carry for more than twenty days food, if possible; he must already have made sea 
on Plock. 

The Viceroy will be returned from his person to Plock from May 10th to May 12th, 
always assuming there is nothing new. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18677. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, April 30, 1812, 


Cousin, I send you your order book. I see some errors; for example, you write to General 
Michaud not to send out the battalions of march belonging to the 2nd corps: it is only of the 4th 
corps that I spoke. You tell General Saint-Cyr not to extend his cavalry more than half a day 
from the Vistula; it is three days from the Vistula that I have said. Besides, the instructions to 
Prince Eckmiihl seem to me sufficient; I do not see anything to add to it. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.°”” 


392 


Page 393 


18678. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. April 30, 1812. 


My Son, my minister in Munich, reports that there are considerable gatherings in the 
mountains of the Venetian countries, composed of deserters and smugglers. Let me know what is 
happening. If this report is well-founded, give orders to the companies of the 13th line 
voltigeurs, to a good detachment of Italian gendarmerie, to four companies of Italian voltigeurs 
under the orders of a good general of brigade, followed of a military commission, of to go 
through these mountains to stop the bandits, to pass them by the arms and to dispel these 
gatherings. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S.A.I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18679. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint-Cloud, May Ist, 1812 


Duke de Feltre, I have read with attention the second part of your report of the 26th of 
this month on the formation of the ten battalions to be fired from the depots employed at the 
Grande Armée. You had forgotten the 29th light, the 10th light, the 36th line, the 44th, the 53rd 
and the 51st. 

The depots of the regiments, having already furnished cadres to the four demi-brigades of 
march, have but one company at the depot, and yet the conduct of the conscripts up to the Grand 
Army would require for the return journey six months, during which time these deposits would 
be depleted. I have therefore decreed that the cadres of the 2nd and 3rd battalions of Belle-Lle, 
who are light infantry, should come to Mainz to receive all the light infantry men whom you 
propose to send to this place; and that the officers of the 2nd battalion of Walcheren, the 4th 
battalion of the Mediterranean, the 3rd and 4th battalion of the Isle of Re, should receive the men 
of the infantry of the line; that the 2nd battalion of Walcheren would receive them at Wesel, the 
Ath of the Mediterranean, at Strasbourg, and the two of the Isle of Re at Mainz. Finally, in the 
table attached to my decree, I have designated the various regiments which will pay in each of 
these six frames; these are the ones you designate in your work to form the first eight battalions 
of march. 

The three companies of the 8th Light and the three of the 18th will continue to form a 
walking battalion. As for the conscripts drawn from the regiments oie 


393 


Page 394 


who are in Italy, it is a battalion which I added to the state of which the cadre of the Ist battalion 
of the 1st regiment of the Mediterranean must receive. 

The 6th battalion of the 37th line was intended to receive refractory conscripts; I first 
gave him the 200 men of the 37th, and then the various remaining conscripts who were not 
sufficient to form a company. 

There will still remain the 5th battalions of the 123rd, 124th, 125th, 126th, 127th, 128th 
and 129th and many others that have been forgotten, such as the 150th, the 3rd, etc .; You will be 
the object of a particular work. As a result of these dispositions, the 3rd Battalion of Belle-Ile 
and the 3rd and 4th of the Isle of Re will no longer receive Spaniards. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy, Depot of War. 


18680. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF THE WAR, IN PARIS, 
St. Cloud, May 2, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, order General Berthier to send from Corsica 300 French men or 
departments of Piedmont, taking care not to take Romans or Tuscans, and to pass them through 
Trieste, from where they will be sent on the 4th battalion of the 8th light, in which they will be 
incorporated, 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war, 


18681. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS, 
St. Cloud, May 2, 1812. 


Cousin, order that the Prussian division commanded by General Grawert to take No. 27, 
Also give numbers to the Prussian cavalry brigades. 
NAPOLEON, 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18682. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTHE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 3, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, my intention is to form a division which will be called the 4th division of 
the reserve, and which will be composed ere 





394 


Page 395 


Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Battalions of the Belle-Ile Regiment (the 4th Battalion of Belle-Lle is 
already part of the 12th Division and is on the march for Berlin, but the meeting will be held 
when the other two advance); 

2nd of the 2nd; 3rd and 4th battalions of the regiment of the Isle of Re (the cadres of the 
3rd and 4th battalions have already been sent and must be completed with conscripts of 1812, 
according to my last decree, give order that the second battalion, 900 strong men, leaving the Isle 
of Re to go to Mainz, leave the master-general to do what he thinks fit for this battalion to be 
well dressed and well equipped before his departure, and to remove the men whose would be less 
safe); 

3rd, 2nd, 3rd and 4th battalions of the Walcheren Regiment (the second battalion will be 
recruited by conscripts of 1812, in accordance with my decree, the 3rd is recruited by Spanish 
prisoners, and the 4th is composed of refractory conscripts who already part of the 12th 
Division); 

4th Of the Ist and 2nd battalions of the 1st regiment of the Mediterranean (the Ist 
remained at Verona to receive conscripts, the 2nd continued his route of 1200 men); 

5th Finally, of the five battalions of the 2nd regiment of the Mediterranean. The five 
colonels will be present to command their own battalions. 

This division will therefore consist of sixteen battalions. For this purpose, you will 
inform General Rampon that it is not my intention that he employ, for the cadres of his 
organization of the National Guards, those of the Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 5th battalions of the 2nd 
regiment of the Mediterranean. He must train new cadres, as everywhere else, and direct the four 
battalions of the 2nd regiment of the Mediterranean on Mainz. It will be appropriate, therefore, 
that the remaining conscripts be provided with the means of recruiting these four battalions. 

As all these regiments have no numbers, once they are returned to the army, I will have 
all the men incorporated in their regiments, or, according to the circumstances, I will give 
numbers to these new regiments. 

Meanwhile, the 4th division of the reserve will have five colonels and sixteen beautiful 
battalions which must meet in Strasbourg, Mainz and Wesel. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war,» 





395 


Page 396 


18683. - TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTR DRS EXTERIOR RELATIONS, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 4, 1812. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, send in the morning of tomorrow to my secretary archivist, to put 
in my portfolio, copies of the last treaties and conventions relating to the current affairs, in 
particular the treaties with Austria, with Prussia, with Denmark , etc .; Join the Erfurt Convention 
and the last treaty with Sweden. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives, 


18684 - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. May 4, 1812. 


My cousin, order that the Legion of the Vistula, commanded by General Claparede, 
follow his march from Dresden to Glogau. Order General Girard to go to Sedan to take 
command of the 4th, 7th and 9th Polish regiments coming from Spain. He will see if everything 
is ready for the deposits to redo their clothing. Deposits will leave Sedan with the regiments. Let 
me know if there is any news from the Ist Polish Light Horse Regiment. Order that all 
detachments of the 1st Polish Light Horse, wherever they may be, continue their route to meet at 
Posen. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18685. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. May 4, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King in Spain, that it is to the Minister of War that the 
correspondence of Spain must be addressed, since you speak for the North. 

Return in the day of Tuesday all the affairs of the armies of Spain to the Minister of War, 
who will have a special office to follow this correspondence, so that, on the night of Tuesday to 
Wednesday, you may be ready to leave. 

NAPOLEON. 


P. S. Do not forget to give him all the figures; it would be*”® 


396 


Page 397 


nevertheless, it is good to keep a copy of it, in case some letter from the King arrives at the army. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18686, - TO THE MOLLIEN COUNTY, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY, IN 
PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 5, 1812, 


Count Mollien, by my decree of April 5, I made a distribution of funds for the Grande 
Armée. The Intendant General has employed only a part of it, and the funds granted for this 
month must be capable of considerable savings. It seemed to me that it was unnecessarily 
complicating the scriptures to have as many different credits as months. I decided to make a 
monthly distribution each month that includes the previous months; so I make one for the months 
of April and May; the next will include April, May and June; so that the one of December will 
include all the funds which will have been granted for the whole exercise. As a result, each 
decree will report past distributions. So you have to give for both ministries of war and 
administration 22 million and so much for two months. You will be guessing what you sent for 
April, and you will only have to provide the difference. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the original comm. by the Countess Mollien. 


18687. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 7, 1812. 


Cousin, I see from the letter of Prince Eckmiihl of April 23 that he is in error; he says in 
this letter that we are not asking to occupy Pillau, because, by the treaty, the Prussians must 
occupy it. This is wrong. Why did the prince so prejudge that by the treaty we should not occupy 
Pillau? You will therefore order Prince Eckmiihl that, as soon as the troops are in motion, he will 
have Pillau occupied by a commander and detachments of his corps. The King of Prussia had to 
give orders for that. The prince was also wrong to allow the artillery pieces which the Prussians 
had placed in the Nehrung to be removed; since they were there, they had to be kept. The pieces 
which were at Memel provided sufficient quantities for the works of Lochstedt.*”” 





397 


Page 398 


I see that, by means of the works of the Prussians, this point of the Nehrung is safe; it must be 
fortified again, for this point is very important. It is necessary to place at the end a strong battery 
beating the sea. Make known to Prince Eckmiihl that, without insulting the Prussians, but in a 
natural manner, it will be necessary as soon as possible to take possession of the citadel of Pillau. 
It may be inconvenient to do this as long as the Prussian corps covers Konigsberg, but it should 
be done when we are on the Pregel, so that it would not be offensive to our allies. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18688. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 7, 1812. 


My Cousin, the siege crew having left Magdeburg, give very precise orders to General La 
Riboisiere to have the necessary constructions made and put in place the armament of the place 
of Magdeburg. My intention is that the place should be perfectly armed, that there should be a 
great quantity of carriages, and that all the carriages which remain there be repaired. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18689. - NOTE TO M. BARBIER, 
LIBRARY OF THE EMPEROR, PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 7, 1812. 


The Emperor asked for a work which had to be delivered to the library of Paris last 
winter, or which perhaps would have remained in the Emperor's cabinet at the Tuileries. It is a 
work by the English Colonel Wilson on the Russian Army, translated from the English by Mr. 
Mounier's office, and bound, manuscript, in red paper with red morocco back. I beg Monsieur 
Barbier to be so kind as to look for it and send it to me by the courier tonight. 

Among the handwritten translations made at Mr. Mounier's office, there must be some 
other works on Russia (among others, a work by M. de Plotho on the organization of the Russian 
army) which might be useful in the journey.*”* 


398 


Page 399 


A small Montaigne might be good to put in the small library. 
The Portfolio Secretary, 
Meneval 


From the original comm. by Mr. Louis Barbier. 


18690. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. May 8, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the states of the military divisions which are given to me on the Ist and 
15th of each month, in accordance with the instructions given in the last campaign, are neglected 
in their writing. Recommend to the generals of the divisions, Ist do make known not only the 
numbers of the battalions, but also the numbers of each company; 2nd to make known in 
observation the number of men that the law grants in workers and the deposits, and why this 
number is exceeded. 

I see in the 2nd military division that the four regiments of the Vistula have 1,000 men 
available: let them go, and even those of the 4th; arrived at Posen, I will take advantage of it. I 
find in the state of this division that the 5th battalion of the 12th of the line has 292 men: I do not 
know whether this battalion has supplied the companies it was to supply to the demi-brigades of 
march; if the number of the companies was indicated there, I would have the certainty. Why, on 
May Ist, did not the 4th Battalion of the 14th leave for Sedan? He had to leave on April 30th. 
The same is true of the 4th Battalion of the 88th. I see that the 12th of chasseurs had 150 horses, 
the 11th 130, the 8th of light horse 280, the 7th 150, and the 5th of hussars 50. Why all this does 
not he not? 

Isee in the 3rd division that the 69th has 500 men, the 76th 550, the 96th 230, the 9th 
light infantry 600, the 10th cuirassiers 150 horses, etc. Why does not that go? 

In the 5th Military Division, I see on May Ist that the 3rd of liana had 1,800 men and the 
105th 1,600. Were the 3rd battalions of these regiments not gone yet? The 18th of liana had 600 
men, the 39th 650, the 57th 260. Did these regiments supply what they had to supply to the 
battalions? I see that the 113th detachment was still in Strasbourg. When are the executives of 
the 46th and the 93rd coming? I also see Swiss detachments ready to leave; why do not we start 
them? 


399 


Page 400 


in the military division, the 4th of chasseurs has 140 horses ready to leave, the 60th has 700 men, 
elc: 

In the 24th Military Division, I see on May Ist that the 48th had 650 men and the 108th 
600; Had they supplied the two companies they must provide to the battalions? 

Give an instruction that these states be made exactly at the 15th and that they arrive at me 
as quickly as possible. 

NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18691. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
St. Cloud, May 8, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, make a circular to all the generals commanding the military divisions so 
that at the 1st of May they spend an extraordinary review of their division, and make leave for its 
destination all that they will find available in men and horses , artillery and carts. To this end, 
you will send to each of them the state of what each corps must furnish to the marching 
battalions, the provisional demi-brigades, & c., The Hanover depot, the park, & c. They will let 
you know what will be left next and what is missing so that it can leave at the end of May. My 
intention is to get as many men and horses away as possible. I have three aims: 1“, To bring 
relief to the army; 2", take advantage of the moment when the heat is less considerable for long 
walks; cae to rid France, and thereby save wheat and food in the months of June, July and 
August, and reduce the expenses of the administration of war, avoiding the consumption of 
fodder, cohorts of national guards can suffice for everything. 

You will charge your bureau of the movement to meet my views by proposing to put in 
motion all the men and horses that remain in France. 

Nevertheless, we must not touch Italy, which forms a separate system, nor the 10th and 
11th military divisions, which guard the Pyrenees; and all that belongs to the 15th, 66th, 70th, 
26th, 82nd, 86th and 47th regiments will have to be destined for Bayonne, to form a strong 
reserve. All the rest, after having completed what I have already asked, will be formed in 
marching battalions which will move from Strasbourg to Berlin. You will offer me the training. 
In a fortnight you”? 





400 


Page 401 


will have my answer, and in the meanwhile, you will prepare everything for their departure. 
Independently of the interest of the army, that of the subsistence gives me a great to make out of 
France several thousand men and horses a few months earlier. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18692. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. May 8, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the eighty-eight cohorts will have eighty-eight companies of artillery; I 
ordered that these companies be sent to the different schools for training. This will give great 
means for the service of the interior and the defense of the coasts. Since nothing belonging to the 
cohorts should leave France, it will be necessary to employ these companies in the custody of the 
frontier posts of the Scheldt, Holland, the coasts of Brittany, the islands of Hyéres and Ré. This 
will make available a large quantity of artillery, which I will call to the army. 

It will be necessary to set in motion, depots of artillery regiments, at the beginning of 
June, about twenty recruits per company, and to train of all these men one or two battalions of 
march, so that one is assured to have replacements for all losses caused by diseases or war. 

Four artillery companies were requested for the rear of the Grand Army, to keep the lines 
of communication. My intention is to place one in Spandau, one in Swedish Pomerania, one at 
Marienburg, and one at Pillau. I believe that I have ordered the management of two of these four 
companies on Wesel and two on Hamburg; the two who are in Wesel will be directed on 
Spandau and Pillau, and the two others who are in Hamburg on Swedish Pomerania and 
Marienburg. These companies will have to be replaced by two new companies for the 32nd 
Military Division and two new companies for the Wesel fort. 

Independently of these four companies, there is a line for Erfurt, which you have already 
designated, which will make five companies for the strongholds of the army; there will be five 
more beyond the Vistula. Thus, under the title of artillery on the rear of the army, there will be 
ten companies, independently of those which are under the title of the places of Oder, Elbe and 
Danzig. 


401 


Page 402 


My intention is for you to direct, as soon as possible, some of the companies that are on 
the island of Elba, the islands of Hyeres and Toulon, to send them to Italy, where I need more 
than artillery companies; but this will only take place when they can be replaced by the six 
companies of the six cohorts who will keep garrison at Toulon. 

The ten companies of the ten cohorts destined for the Pyrenees will be able to provide for 
the defense of Cette and the service of Perpignan and Bayonne; which will still give you 
available line artillery. 

The cohort brigade to guard La Rochelle will be able to supply your six companies to the 
island of Aix, the island of Oleron and the isle de Ré (which will also make several companies 
available), as well as the companies cohorts of Brittany who will keep Brest, Belle-Ile, etc. Make 
a report on this object, which will give me the number and strength of the artillery companies 
that will become available, and what exists at the depots of the different regiments. 

It would be a great pleasure to have a few companies in the course of the summer to 
replace at Modlin, Zamosc, and Thorn the Polish artillery, which I am told to be uneducated. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18693. - TO GENERAL LEBRUN, DUKE OF PLAISANCE, 
AIDE DE CAMP OF THE EMPEROR, IN PARIS. 
Saint Cloud. May 8, 1812. 


Monsieur le Duke de Plaisance, you will leave tomorrow. Meet in Aachen, Cologne and 
Diisseldorf. You will see the situation of the Ist division of the reserve, its dress, the instruction 
of the men, the number of officers which each regiment lacks. Let me know if this division has 
orders to march on Magdeburg. See also the troops of the Grand Duchy of Berg, Let me know 
when the two complete battalions can start, as well as what must leave to complete the other 
corps. 

You will go from there to Wesel. See the situation of the 4th and 5th battalions; number 
and species of men; the desertion that there would have been. See also refractory conscripts. Let 
me know when the 6th battalions of the 37th and 56th, brought to 810 men each, will be able to 
leave for Spandau. Take information on the desertion of the 29th and 4th battalions of the 10th 
Light. Visit the*”” 





402 


Page 403 


ramparts of Wesel, to see if one is arming the place; see also engineering works and anything 
that interests me. Make me a report on each of these places. 

From Wesel, you will go to Cassel; stay there two days. You will see the Queen, my 
minister. You will obtain the exact status of the 5th battalions and cavalry depots, with their 
location, rifles and artillery. You will inform yourself of what there is to fear from the spirit of 
the inhabitants, and you will make known to me what French troops would require to contain 
them if necessary; you will also take information on the situation of the gendarmerie, and if you 
do not, you will inform me of the help that might be offered from the country, supposing the 
descent of the English. 

Go from Kassel to Leipzig and Brunswick. You will stay one day in each of these cities 
to make the same observations. Go everywhere in hospitals; see how many sick Frenchmen there 
are, and if they are well treated there, and give them consolation. Then go to Magdeburg, and 
make me a detailed report on this place, the works of engineering, its weapons, the sale of 
colonial goods, and the amount of rice and brandy and other objects of the army which are there. 

From Magdeburg you will go to Spandau. Spend a day there to see the citadel and all that 
can be interesting. 

You will stay two days in Berlin. See the situation of the troops. Arrange to arrive, if 
possible, to the 20th at Posen. It is in this city that you will send me all your reports, which you 
will take care to number. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Duke de Plaisance. 


18694. - ADDRESS OF THE EMPEROR 
TO THE DEPUTATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF APPENNINS. 
Palace of St. Cloud, May 8, 1812. 


I have always recognized in the people of Genoa much attachment to France. I am glad of 
what you are telling me. The first time I cross the Alps, I will go to your department and the 
beautiful Gulf of Spezia. The paths and works I have undertaken on this important point will be 
finished. 


Excerpt from the Moniteur of May 9, 1812.4 





403 


Page 404 


18695. - TO M. MELZI, DUKE OF LODI, 
CHANCELLOR OF THE KINGDOM OF ITALY, IN MILAN. 
(TELEGRAPHIC DISPATCH.) 
Saint Cloud. May 8, 1812. 


Let me know if there is something new in Italy and everything is working properly. Write 
to me every day, in Paris, two words, which you will send to the Archchancellor, who will 
inform me of the situation in Italy. They will be sent to me by the courier; for I intend to leave 
for Dresden tomorrow. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire. 


18696.- TO FREDERIC, KING OF WURTEMBERG, AT LUDWIGSBURG. 
Mainz. May 11, 1812. 


Brother, I receive your Majesty's letter when I go to Mainz. I thank her for her wishes for 
the happy outcome of the events that seem to be preparing. I hope that they will be able to 
provide me with new opportunities to give him proof of my esteem and interest in the expansion 
of his house. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by the government of the King of Wiirttemberg. 


18697. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden. May 17, 1812. 


A Neapolitan division is on the march for Verona; give order that it be formed and rests 
in this city. You will let me know when she gets there, for me to give her further orders, my 
intention being not that she leave without my order. 

Before binding to Paris, I ordered the King of Naples to send back to the kingdom a 
cavalry regiment and an infantry regiment, in order to lessen the strength of the interior. The 
Queen will be able to use it to further garnish the Apulia. 

Tell General Grenier that he remains under the Queen's orders to defend Naples, but that 
as long as this kingdom is not threatened, he must remain together to march to the aid of Rome, 
Ancona, or Tuscany, if one or other of these points was attacked. I will also make known to 
Posen my later dispositions.“™ 


404 


Page 405 


It would be convenient to organize two artillery batteries in General Grenier's corps. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18698. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 17, 1812. 


Cousin, send the duke of Bellune to direct all the battalions of march, namely, those 
destined for the 3rd and 4th corps, by the shortest way, on Thorn, those of the 2nd corps on 
Marienwerder and those of the 1st on Marienburg. 

Put me under the conditions of all the depots of Magdeburg, Spandau, Stettin, Kiistrin, 
Glogau, etc., so that I give an order to remove all that will be available. 

Order also General Sourcier to send all the cavalrymen, my men and their condition, to 
join their respective corps. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18699. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 17, 1812. 


My Cousin, give me the state of all the patients that the 6th and 7th corps, the 
Wurtembergers, and other Confederate troops now have. Write to the different governors to send 
out battalions to replace the sick and to complete these regiments. 

From the unsigned original. Deposit of the war. 


18700. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGHAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 11, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia, at Warsaw, that he was wrong to build bridges 
over the Vistula; that it is a military operation to build bridges over a river as considerable as the 
Vistula; that I would have prescribed it if I had judged it fit; that if it is not done yet, it must not 
be done; that bins and some boats*” 





405 


Page 406 


there are enough bridges to occupy a large number of boats necessary for the navigation and 
supplies of the army; if they are thrown, let them leave. Write to him that he has not yet sent his 
comments on Modlin; that he should go to Pultusk, in person, to see the country; I had had 
Pultusk set up a handling, I wish him to make known whether it still exists, and how many 
furnaces there are, that he must also see in what state are the works which had been begun at 
Sierock; that I wish him to let me know if there are any bridges at Ostrolenka and Pultusk, and in 
what state are the country works which I left to these bridgeheads, and finally in what state are 
the bridge of Modlin, the bridge and fortifications of Praga, and how many furnaces are at 
Zamosc; that it would be necessary to start spraying some flours on Pultusk. 

Mandez that all the troops of the 3rd corps who would be in Posenet in Gnesen leave 
without delay to go on Thorn. 

Write to the Duke of Elchingen to make flour on Strasbourg and Osterode, and to 
ascertain the state of Osterode's handling. 

Tell the prince of Eckmiihl that, if the means of milling are rare in Elbing, he begins to 
make 20,000 quintals of Danzig flour on Elbing; that I ask the Duke of Elchingen to send 10,000, 
from Thorn to Osterode. Send the same thing to the Intendant General. 

NAPOLEON, 
From the original, Deposit of the war. 


18701. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden, May 18, 1812, 


Duke de Feltre, I receive the work that was attached to your letter of May 11th. Here are 
my definitive intentions, give orders for their prompt execution. 

The Ist division of the reserve, commanded by General Lagrange, which meets in 
Coblenlz, Diisseldorf and Aachen, will be composed of the Ist demi-brigade of strong march of 
three battalions, the 2nd, 3rd and 4th demi-brigade. marching brigades also of three battalions, 
and the 6th battalions of the 19th, 37th, 56th, 93rd, and 46th, which are at Wesel and Strasburg; 
total, seventeen battalions. You will order that these seventeen battalions go to Magdeburg. You 
will let me know their order of march and the day each of these"? 


406 


Page 407 


battalions will arrive at his destination, so that I give the subsequent orders. These seventeen 
battalions, forming about 14,000 men, will be destined to temporarily hold garrisons at 
Magdeburg, Spandau, and Berlin; which will allow me to have the 9th body. I have nothing to 
change, therefore, to the training proposed in your statement, which, of course, seems to me to be 
correct. 

The 2nd division of the reserve, commanded by General Heudelet, will meet immediately 
at Miinster and Osnabriick. It will consist of the 6th demi - brigade, which will be extended to 
four battalions; the 7th, which is four battalions; from the 8th and 9th, which have four 
battalions; finally, the 17th, which will also be only four battalions. This division will therefore 
be organized in accordance with your state No. 2, except that the 5th battalion of the 17th demi- 
brigade, composed of two companies of the 5th battalion of the 28th, two of the 5th battalion of 
the 43rd and two of the 5th battalion of the 65th, instead of being part of the 17th demi-brigade, 
will form the 4th battalion of the 6th demi-brigade. I wish another change, that the 3rd battalion 
of the 17th demi - brigade be composed of only the six companies of the 4th battalion of the 25th 
light. We will pay for this purpose all that would be available in the 9th light. These five demi - 
brigades will form twenty battalions. Two brigadier generals will be attached to it. You will let 
me know the day each battalion arrives at Osnabruck and Minster, so that I may dispose of it. 
General Heudelet's headquarters will be in Miinster. 

The 3rd division, under the orders of General Merle, will be composed of the 10th demi- 
brigade, strong of four battalions, the strong island of three battalions, the 12th strong of four, 
and the 13th strong of three. I let you know that I approved the training that you propose to me in 
your stalls 1 and 2, with a few exceptions in the latter. I also approve even state n ° 3, except that 
I do not want 113 men of the 8th of line are incorporated in the 50th; and if the 5th battalions of 
the 36th, 51st, and 55th could not furnish the complete cadres of two companies, since already 
these 5th battalions supplied two companies to the demi-brigades of march, you could, before 
their departure from Boulogne, serve you a cadre of the 2nd regiment of the Mediterranean to 
understand these conscripts. For this purpose, this frame would go to Boulogne. 

The 4th Division will be composed of three Battalions of Belle - Ile, three of the Isle of 
Ré, three of the Walcheren Regiment, two of the 1st Regiment of the Mediterranean, and three of 
the 2nd Regiment of the Mediterranean; which makes fourteen battalions. I approve state # fs 


407 


Page 408 


You will take care that the men of the 8th and 18th light embark in Strasbourg for Wesel. The 
37th of the line can not have anything to provide to the 4th battalion of the 2nd regiment of the 
Mediterranean, since it must have to provide to its 6th battalion, independently of the demi- 
brigades of march. I also approve the supplement you want to give to the Ist battalion of the 2nd 
regiment of the Mediterranean, but I can not approve that you place in the 2nd battalion of the 
2nd regiment of the Mediterranean men of the 28th light, with infantry of line: it is absolutely 
necessary to separate the line infantry from the light infantry. My intention is for this 4th 
Division to meet in Spandau and Berlin. The 4th battalion of Belle-Ile, the 2nd of the island of 
Ré, the 4th of Walcheren, the 2nd of the Mediterranean, all four composed of former refractory 
conscripts, have orders to meet at Spandau and Berlin, where they will wait the passage of their 
division. The 2nd and 3rd battalions of Belle-Ile are to be formed at Mainz and Wesel as soon as 
possible. The 3rd and the 4th of the Ile de Ré are formed in Mainz, the 2nd Walcheren which 
forms at Wesel, the 3rd Walcheren to be formed in Strasbourg, where it will be composed of 
Spaniards, Ist of the 1st regiment of the Mediterranean which is formed in Verona, the Ist of the 
2nd of the Mediterranean which will be formed in Mainz, the 2nd of the same regiment which 
will be formed also in Mainz, finally the 4th battalion of the same regiment which will be formed 
in Strasbourg, all these battalions, as and when they are formed, will march, cross the Rhine at 
Wesel, Mainz or Strasbourg, and will be directed to Spandau and Berlin. General Durulle will 
command this division; and as he commands at this moment at Berlin, his division will be 
formed under his very eyes. 

This reserve will therefore consist of four divisions: 

1st division, General Lagrange, seventeen battalions, at Berlin and at Magdeburg; 2nd 
division, General Heudelet, twenty battalions, at Miinster and Osnabriick; 3rd division, General 
Merle, fourteen battalions, first at Utrecht, Boulogne, and Chambery, to be then directed to 
Miinster and Osnabriick, according to the order I will give; 4th Division, General Durutte, 
fourteen battalions, at Berlin; sixty-five battalions, thirty-one in Berlin and thirty-four in Miinster 
and Osnabriick. 

It is evident that the 1st Division will receive the first order to go to the Vistula to be 
incorporated into the respective regiments; which will make executives, who will return to 
France for the conscription of 1813. The 4th Division will also receive orders to go to the 
Vistula, where each detachment which has been incorporated*”® 


408 


Page 409 


in the cadre of the refractory regiments will be able to join his regiment or to remain united in 
these frames, according to the circumstances. The 2nd and 3rd divisions will remain in the rear, 
in the 32nd division, between Oder and Elbe. They belong to the regiments of the army of Spain; 
they will form there a reserve which will be able to be carried everywhere where one will need it. 

It is necessary that the six battalions which are at Wesel and Strasburg, and which I have 
joined with the Ist Division, leave Wesel and Strasburg, as soon as they are completed, to go 
straight to Berlin. 

You do not have a moment to lose for the formation of these four reserve divisions. Tell 
the Major General and the divisional commanders who must command them, and ship all orders. 

To these forces must be added the brigade of Erfurt, composed of a battalion of the 3rd, 
one of the 105th, two of the 29th, and the marching regiment of Paris; which will, I believe, 
make six battalions, or 4 to 5,000 men. Order the two battalions of the 29th of the line coming 
from Toulon to Lyons to march with their artillery company on Erfurt; and give orders that the 
regiment of march of the city of Paris, organized according to my order of the 8th of May, should 
also go to Erfurt. This will make a reserve on this point which, under the orders of a brigadier 
general, may be carried wherever it may be necessary. 

Your state No. 4 contains the 1st, 2nd and 3rd provisional demi-brigades, which makes 
12 battalions, or the Ist reserve brigade of the year of Spain; and the 4th and 5th provisional 
demi-brigades, forming the nine battalions of the 2nd Brigade of the Army of Spain. I do not 
approve that the 2nd light supply 200 men to the 4th light. The 9th Light should not provide 
anything to anyone, since it is necessary to train again the battalion which he lost in Badajoz. 
The same is true of the 103rd and the 100th, all these regiments having lost in Badajoz battalions 
that must be reformed. 

The 34th of line has two battalions to train; he can not supply anything to the 14th. It will 
then be necessary for the battalion of the 69th (the 4th of the 2nd provisional demi-brigade, to 
wait until it can be completed by some extraordinary means. 

The Ist demi-brigade must already be organized at Versailles; the 2nd must be in motion 
on Cherbourg; the 3rd must be in motion to form at Saint-Lé and Valoanes; the 4th should be 
organized in Pontivy, and the 5th in La Rochelle. Nor do I approve that the 47th, 70th and 79th 
provide conscripts on the 26th of liana and the 82nd, because these 5th battalions, which are in 
Brittany, will need*” 





409 


Page 410 


to always have people to serve the coast. Thus the battalion of the 26th will be only 300 men, 
that of the 82nd only 300 men. These two battalions, like that of the 69th, will be completed 
later. 

I go to your state No. 5. I see no advantage in removing conscripts from the 10th line to 
put them in the 67th. This also applies to conscripts of the 20th and 102nd. It seems to me that 
these 5th battalions, remaining in Italy, must offer resources for garrisons and mobile columns. 
The 4th Battalion of the 67th will be completed later, as well as the 3rd battalion of the 7th line 
and 4th of the 101st. The 42nd can all the less provide the latter with the need to reform the cadre 
of the battalion that this regiment lost in Spain. Thus I wish that the 14th demi - brigade be 
formed as follows: 1st battalion, the 6th battalion of the 10th of line: 2nd battalion, the 6th 
battalion of the 20th of line; 3rd Battalion, 3rd Battalion, 67th; 4th battalion, two companies of 
the 5th battalion of the 10th of line, two companies of the 5th battalion of the 20th line, two 
companies of the 4th battalion of the 67th. 

The 15th demi-brigade will be formed as follows: Ist battalion, the 4th battalion of the 
Ist of light infantry; 2nd Battalion, 4th Battalion 3rd Light; 3rd Battalion; two companies of the 
3rd battalion of the 7th, two companies of the 5th battalion of the 102nd, two companies of the 
5th battalion of the 101st. 

Thus the brigade of Alexandria will consist of three demi-brigades or seven battalions. As 
for the 42nd, we will reform the frame that was destroyed. 

Nor do I approve of the 23rd and 60th paying their conscripts in the 62nd and 16th lines, 
since from one moment to another the battalion of the 60th and the 23rd, which are in Spain, may 
to return to the depot, and that in the meanwhile these conscripts, kept at their 5th battalion, will 
do the service perfectly on the coast. 

Independently of this, the 4th battalions which will remain to be completed will be by a 
call, which will be made within a month, men of good will of the cohorts, who will agree to pass 
in the line. My intention is to take 150 per cohort; which will make 12,000 men who will serve to 
complete all these frames. 

I hope that all this will be in motion, and that you will inform me of the arrival times of 
each brigade and battalion, so that I may know when I will be able to dispose of each division, as 
well as the brigade of Erfurt. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war.” 


410 


Page 411 


18702. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 20, 1812. 


My Cousin, write to the Duke of Bellune that we must continue to treat the Swedish as 
friends; that consequently the Swedish troops and sailors can remain where they are; but that if, 
before things were decided, there was danger that Pomerania would be attacked, these men 
should be disarmed and sent to the interior. 

Inform the Duke of Bellune of the arrival of General Lagrange's division, composed of 
seventeen battalions, which is marching for Magdeburg. Inform him of the orders I have given 
for the meeting of a brigade at Erfurt and for the arming of the citadel. 

Order Delaborde Division (1st Guard) to leave Stettin and proceed to Danzig. It will be 
able to walk in two columns by the two roads. Instruct Prince Eckmihl with this movement. Let 
him know that I suppose that, independently of the 300 men who will remain at Danzig, there 
must be 1,600 men of the navy and depots of his army, and that the division which arrives there 
will form with all this a sufficient garrison; that, finally, it is up to him to take measures to ensure 
that this important place is never lost, by leaving a French regiment there; that I desire the allied 
troops to serve with the French, to take the pace and the spirit; that, in the course of June, there 
will be at Danzig a march division composed of French battalions, having at heart that this 
important point be occupied by my own troops. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18703. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN 
Dresden. May 20, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to General Riboisiere to have 3,000 rifles supplied to arm the 3rd 
battalions of the Vistula Legion who have arrived at Posen. He will take these guns among the 
best in Kiistrin, and recommend him to make sure that these three regiments are well armed. 

Tell him that 3,000 more rifles are needed to arm the 4th, 78th and 98th Polish regiments 
arriving 





411 


Page 412 


of Spain and who will be in June in Posen, these regiments each needing a thousand men to be 
worn in full. 

See here the Minister of Saxony for 3,000 other conscripts to be assembled at Posen to 
recruit these three regiments, and write to the Intendant General for measures to be taken to dress 
these 3,000 men. 

By this means the legion of the Vistula will be composed of three regiments, each of 
three battalions; which will make nine battalions. The three Polish regiments arriving from Spain 
will also be composed of three battalions each, which will be in full force of 160 men per 
company, which is the strength of the Polish regiments. These six regiments will thus supply 
18,000 men. 

I see from your letter of the 18th of May that the 3,000 men destined for the Vistula 
Legion are ready at Posen. Do not waste a moment so that the 3,000 men needed by the three 
regiments who come back from Andalusia are also gathered in Posen. 

Order that these three regiments commanded by General Girard, who arrive from May 21 
to June 2 in Sedan, go to Mainz, from where they will continue their journey on Fulde, Erfurt 
and Posen, walking in order to arrive the most promptly possible, but without getting too tired. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18704. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 21, 1812. 


My Cousin, it is fitting that you send one of your aide-de-camp at Lemberg, passing it 
through Warsaw. You will ask M. de Melternich if he has anything to say to the Prince of 
Schwarzenberg. The purpose of sending this aide-de-camp will be to announce my arrival and to 
announce that my headquarters will be taken to Posen. Send someone who can talk and who is 
pleasant. This officer will be charged with bringing a figure to the Prince of Schwarzenberg, so 
that the secret things may be transmitted in numbers, since it is to be feared that the Cossacks 
will seize some orderly officer. He will report the situation of the Austrian army, what is new, 
and the strength of the troops in Podolia and Volhynia, opposed to the Austrian corps.*!? 





412 


Page 413 


Your aide-de-camp will spend four or five days at Prince Schwarzenberg's headquarters. He will 
return from there by Zamosc, if there is no inconvenience; he will visit this place, the 
fortifications, the shops, etc., will see the garrison, and will inquire as to the strength of the 
enemy in the environs of Zamosc and to the marshes of Pinsk. After which he will return by 
Warsaw to join you in Posen. 

You will instruct the Prince of Schwarzenberg to send another officer five days after the 
departure of your aide-de-camp to carry the situation of the five days and to make known what is 
new on the line and the different movements of the Russians. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18705. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 21, 1812. 


My Cousin, order the 2nd Foot Guards Regiment, 2nd and 3rd Foot Grenadiers, to leave 
Glogau on the 21st and 22nd for Posen. Order the 1st Foot Regiment, which arrived on May 12th 
at Glogau, as well as Ist Foot Grenadier Regiment, to leave on the 23rd and 24th for Posen. 
Order all the artillery that arrived before May 15 at Glogau, the sappers and the engineer train, to 
leave on the 24th and 25th for Posen. Order all the cavalry arrived before May 15th at Glogau to 
leave for Posen also on the 23rd, 24th, 25th. Give me accordingly a state of your part of the 
Guard, infantry, cavalry and artillery, which will remain at Glogau, and of the party that will 
depart from it in consequence of the present order. 

NAPOLEON, 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18706. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 21, 1812. 


Cousin, let the Duke of Elchingen know that, as the season of operations is about to 
commence, it is necessary that he push the head of his infantry on Osterode and that his cavalry 
also approaches this place, for it is pro on the Ist of June he will receive orders to carry his 
headquarters to Osterode. Give him the order*! 





413 


Page 414 


to organize the handling of Osterode and to make flour there. 

Write to the viceroy that it is necessary for him to reorganize the handling at Willenberg, 
that he carries the head of his cavalry, and even an advance guard of infantry on this point; that it 
is probable that, when I shall know when the 4th corps arrives, in the first days of June, it will 
receive order to carry its headquarters to Willenberg. 

Tell the King of Westphalia that it is necessary for the Polish cavalry to approach the 
Narew, in order to give the viceroy the latitude which has 80,000 men to feed on Plock, and that 
he has all the right to feed himself. Ask him to set up the handling of Pultusk, have Warsaw 
flours brought there, have the ovens of Ostrolenka restored, and form a flour shop there. 

Tell the Prince of Eckmiihl that it is necessary that Bruyere's division should not interfere 
with the viceroy's communications, and that his cavalry should retire to the left; that we are here 
in June, when the grass must be good. Order the artillery general to send from Danzia to Elbing a 
hitched deck crew. Warn the Prince of Eckmiithl to inspect the deck crew and make sure that in 
twenty-four hours we can throw one or two decks, if need be, on the Narew, Ask when the 
second deck crew can be hitched and set in motion. 

You will teach the Prince of Eckmiihl the orders you give all the way. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18707. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 21, 1812. 


My cousin, order that all the surgeons, all the administrations of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd 
corps, which would be in the 32nd military division, in the kingdom of Westphalia, in Prussia, 
and on the left bank of the Oder, leave without deadline to join their respective corps on the 
Vistula. The authorizing Commissioners are responsible for the execution of this order. Charge 
them to send the states of what's left. This order is common in Mecklenburg and Saxony. 
Desiring that all the equipment and the administrations of the army are on the right bank of the 
Vistula, the hospitals which*!* 





414 


Page 415 


remain in the 32nd military division and on the left bank of the Oder, as well as the 
administrations, must be served by the country's employees. Write this to the commanders of the 
different corps, so that they bring back what would be on their rear belonging to their corps. 
Make known to Prince Eckmiihl that he was wrong to leave his staff on the rear, that he must 
gather everything at his headquarters, but that the order I give remedies that. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18708. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 21, 1812. 


Cousin, send an order to the Duke of Bellune to have Spandau take up the battalions 
which are there by a battalion of Wurzburg, and by a French battalion in the division of General 
Partouneaux. He will give this regiment half a battery of artillery taken from that attached to the 
division Partouneaux; so that General Merle happens to have 15,000 men and half a battery to 
make sure of the important position of Spandau, 

The Duke of Bellune will bring the different battalions of march to Berlin; he will review 
it himself, and direct all that belongs to the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd corps to Marienwerder, whence 
each detachment will join his regiment. Everything that belongs to the 4th Corps will be directed 
to Plock. 

Tell the Duke of Belluno that it is necessary that part of the two battalions which I place 
at Spandau enter the citadel to do the service there, and proceed to armament. A war 
commissioner and a health officer must be sent to that place. Have orders issued accordingly. All 
this must be done without speaking. If we ask the reason for this armament, we must reply that 
the importance of this place requires that it be sheltered from all event and descent of the 
English. 

Recommend to General Merle to give dinner to the Prussian officers and be very honest 
with them. 

NAPOLEON 


From the original. Deposit of the war." 





415 


Page 416 


18709. - TO CAPTAIN OF HAUTPOUL 
EMPEROR'S OFFICER OF ORDER, IN WARSAW. 
Dresden. May 21, 1812. 


Captain Hautpoul, you must be back in Warsaw since the 20th; you will have sent me 
your report on Zamosc. I am sending you an instruction on a new mission. You will turn to 
Prince Poniatowski for letters of recommendation. You will ask him for Polish officers to 
accompany you in your recognition, and you will dispatch these officers from the different points 
with your reports. It will be proper that, to avoid giving shade, you should pass for an officer of 
the staff of Prince Poniatowski, and that you should take the Polish uniform accordingly. 

NAPOLEON. 


INSTRUCTION. 

The captain of Hautpoul will proceed from Warsaw to Terespol, and will see as near as 
possible the place of Brzesc; if she is strong, how she is armed, and what resistance she can do. 
He will note well the route of Warsaw to Brzesc, He will take information on the strength of the 
Russians on this side, on what they have in the direction of Slonime, on the right of the marsh of 
Pinsk, towards Lithuania and towards left. 

He will come back on the border to recognize the Bug until Nur. He will note the width 
of the river, the location of the banks, the nature of the road, etc. He will tell Nur what the 
Russians have in Bransk and Bielsk. 

Captain d'Hautpoul will send his reports by an officer to Warsaw, from where they will 
be dispatched to Posen. 

From Nur, he will go to Tykocin, along the Polish border. He will see what the Russians 
have at Bialystok and on this frontier, and will recognize the communication of the wheels with 
Warsaw. He will send a new Tykocin Express to bring his reports to Warsaw. He will come as 
close as possible to Grodno to recognize this place and what is happening there. He will carefully 
observe the various communications with Lyk, with Augustowo, and in different directions. He 
will send from there a new express to Warsaw. He will continue his reconnaissance of the border 
until Olitta, and he will make different excursions that can give him the knowledge of the land 
between Olitta, Narew and Vistula. After which he will return to Posen.*!° 


416 


Page 417 


NOTE. 

lst There exists between Grodno, Augustowo, Suwalki, Seyny, and the Niernen, a very 
vast and marshy forest, which appears to be very difficult to access; it would be necessary to 
have good information on the nature of this forest, and good or bad roads that cross it and 
facilitate communication on Grodno. 

2nd Olitta should also be informed of another extensive forest covering a large portion of 
the country on the left bank of the Niemen from Johannisburg to Maryampol and Preny; it seems 
that she has to make detours to reach Kovno. Are the roads of Johannisburg, Wilkowyski, 
Maryampol, all on Rovno, practicable? 

3rd Assuming an army corps at Tilsit and another corps at Bialystok or Grodno, how 
could they communicate together by flanking movements? What would be the routes from Tilsit 
and Insterburg to Olitta, Meretch, Grodno, Bialystok? 

Details of the nature of these roads, the woods and marshes to be crossed, the 
approximate population of the cities, local resources, distances, etc., should be provided. 

From the original comm. by the Marquis d'Hautpoul. 


18710. - TO PRINCE BORGHESE, 
GOVERNOR GENERAL OF THE DEPARTMENTS ALONG THE ALPS, .A TURIN. 
Dresden. May 21, 1812, 


Cousin, I have been in Dresden for two days with the Empress, with the Emperor and 
Empress of Austria. I intend to stay there a few more days, All my army is on the Vistula. There 
is nothing new yet. Hostilities are not started; 

Having just learned that English ships are in front of Savona, I think it is necessary to put 
the Pope in safety. As a result, you will instruct the prefect and the commander of the 
gendarmerie to send the Pope with his senses in two good wagons. The Pope will have his doctor 
in his wagon. The precautions will be taken so that it crosses Turin by night, that it stops only 
with the mount Cenis, that it crosses Chambéry and Lyon by night, and that it is thus taken to 
Fontainebleau, where the orders are given to receive it. I am referring to your prudence and that 
of the commander of the gendarmerie. Take care that the Pope's wagon is good and that*!” 





417 


Page 418 


all the proper precautions are taken. The Pope must not travel in pontifical clothes, but only in 
ecclesiastical clothes, and so that nowhere on the road, except at Mount Cenis, can he be 
recognized. Unless there is an event, this measure is not so urgent that you can not send for the 
Prefect of Montenotte to arrange with him in advance this departure. 

You will send the attached letter to the Duke of Lodi. I write to him to send you to Turin 
the Archbishop of Edessa. When this Archbishop arrives at Turin, you will inform him of my bet 
that you have a mission to confide to him, and as soon as you learn that the Pope will be at a post 
beyond Turin, you will rejoin him. He will get into the Pope's car and accompany him for the 
rest of the way. You will make known to this prelate that the situation of affairs in Europe and 
the presence of the English before Savona made the Pope's residence dangerous in that city; that 
he must be placed in the center of the Empire; that he will be received at Fontainebleau by the 
bishops of the deputation; that he will occupy the dwelling he has already lived in; that he will 
see the cardinals who are in France, & c. 

You will correspond for the execution of these measures with the Minister of Police. I 
want the greatest secret to be kept. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original comm. by the Marquis Gozani di San Giorgio. 


18711. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 22, 1812. 


Cousin, I see that your state of headquarters is only 10; however, it is today the 22nd. 

Write to Posen so that within twenty-four hours you will be sent a new state. I want to know if 
Major Clicquot, crews, has arrived, as well as the printing press. It is very urgent that I receive 
these stalls so that [can make my arrangements. Why is the state of the Ist corps only 5 May? I 
should have that of 13. In this situation of May 3, I see that there are many men detached. Order 
the Prince of Eckmiihl to summon all his people and not bother with the rear. The number of his 
detachments is up to 4,000. It is very urgent that the Prince of Eckmiihl sends special orders to 
recall what he has behind, and that his whole corps si 





418 


Page 419 


on the right bank of the Vistula. I see in the situation of the Bruyere Division, on the 10th of 
May, that the 6th Polish Lancers Regiment was still at Oslrolenka and near, and that the 8th was 
still near Pultusk. It is necessary that these regiments fall back on the left bank of the Alle. 

In general, the states you put before me are almost a month old; it is ridiculous that they 
are so backward, it's as if [have nothing. You do not take the necessary steps to have them 
exactly; it's your fault. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18712. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 22, 1812. 


My cousin, the duke of Bassano must have informed you that I advanced a million on the 
loan of Saxony for the service of the Polish army; that this million must be paid in two terms; 
that it is necessary, therefore, that the paymaster-general of the army should send 500,000 francs 
to Warsaw for the needs of the year, and that the other 500,000 francs should be paid later. 
Therefore, give orders for 500,000 francs to be sent to Warsaw twenty-four hours after the 
receipt of this order. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18713. - NOTE FOR THE MINISTER OF WAR. 
Dresden, May 22, 1812. 


From the Ist of January, 1812, nothing will be granted to the Prince of Eckmiihl beyond 
the salary of marshal commanding a corps d'armee, with the extraordinary per month. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy. Finance Archives. 


18114. - TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, 
MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 23, 1812. 


Mr. Duke de Bassano, I am sending you a report on Kolberg. Take a copy of it, which 
you will send to M. de Saint-Marsan, and then have it returned to the major-general. He*”” 





419 


Page 420 


It appears from this report that Prussia still has many stores at Kolberg, from which it could be 
depleted to aid the subsistence of the army. 
NAPOLEON, 
From the original comm. by the Duc de Bassano. 


18715, - TO MADAME LA COMTESSE DE MONTESQUIOU, 
GOVERNOR OF THE HOUSE OF CHILDREN OF FRANCE, IN PARIS. Dresden, May 23, 
1812, 


Countess of Montesquiou, I received all your letters until May 16th. I am learning with 
pleasure the good health of the King. I have confidence in medicine in my first doctor Corvisart. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by General Count de Montesquiou-Fezensac. 


18716. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden, May 23, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, make known to the Grand Duchess that the enemy intends to attack the 
island of Elba, and that it send Prince Felix to inspect the garrison of this island, his means of 
defense, its stores, etc. 

The 7th battalion of the 6th of the line, that of the 14e light, the 3rd battalion of the 
Mediterranean, the Italian colonial battalion, form four battalions worth 3,000 men; which, with 
the two companies of artillery, the two coast-guard companies and the battalion of the island of 
Elba, forms a garrison of 4,000 men. A good commander of arms at Porto Ferrajo, a chief of 
artillery battalion, a superior engineer and a good general to command the island are needed. I 
suppose the stores are safe from the bomb, and the place is stocked with all that is needed. 

Let me know the situation of the 112th Regiment. He must have present five battalions 
and more than 4,000 men under arms; Are these men dressed, equipped, armed and able to walk? 

Tell the Grand Duchess that if the enemy attacked either Rome, Ancona, Venice, Naples 
or Genoa, the foreign battalion at Livorno, the 112th regiment, and the cohorts of National 
Guards of Tuscany , forming a corps of 6,000 men, must, under the command of a brigadier 
general, 





420 


Page 421 


with six pieces of cannon hitched on the spot by extraordinary means of the country, to set in 
motion on the point threatened. 

Instruct General Miollis, General Vianolle Commander in Italy, and Prince Borghese 
Commander in Piedmont. 

General Miollis has three battalions of the 6th line, three battalions of the 14th light, the 
2nd battalion of foreign soldiers, and the cohort of national guards of Rome, in all eight 
battalions, which would form a division of 8,000 men. General Miollis would at once organize 
twelve pieces of cannon, which he would have served by the line artillery which he had at Home, 
and this column would be carried either to Rome, or to Livorno, or to Naples, or on Ancona, or 
on Venice, if these points were attacked. It is necessary that the battalions of the 6th line and the 
14th light be worn in full. Inform her of the Grand Duchess, Marshal Perignon, the commanding 
general in Italy, and Prince Borghese. 

Prince Borghese will have the 14th temporary demi-brigade strong of four battalions, the 
15th strong of four battalions, the 4th cohort of national guards forming four battalions, the four 
battalions of the 52nd; which would make sixteen battalions or two divisions, each of 6,000 men, 
each of whom would be attached to eight pieces of cannon harnessed by the means of the 
country. These divisions would be, according to the circumstances, or on Rome, or on Venice, or 
on Ancona, on Genoa, on Nice, or even on Toulon. It is, therefore, necessary that the Grand 
Duchess, General Miollis, Marshal Perignon, and the Commanding General in Italy be 
forewarned of these provisions. 

The commanding general in Italy happens to have, by the dispositions I have taken, three 
divisions forming 18,000 men, namely, one on the Adige, one on the side of Ancona, and one on 
the side of Milan, which would also be on the Illyrian provinces with infantry, cavalry and 
artillery. 

Thus, in Italy, there are the forces of General Grenier, with 8,000 infantrymen, 500 
Neapolitan horses, fourteen Neapolitan artillery pieces, and ten regimental pieces; the division of 
Rome, with 9,000 men and twelve pieces of cannon; the division of Tuscany, with 6,000 men 
and six pieces of cannon; the three divisions of the kingdom of Italy, with 18,000 men and 1,500 
horses; the two divisions of Piedmont, 12,000 strong, 1,200 horses, and twelve pieces of cannon. 

These corps will thus form a force of 50,000 men of infantry and of 3,000 horses and 
eighty-four pieces of cannon, independently of the Neapolitan army, 40,000 strong men.” 


421 


Page 422 


infantry, 4,000 horses, and seventy pieces of cannon. 

You see, therefore, that we could go with nearly 100,000 men on a point that would be 
threatened, not to mention what could be drawn from Geneva and the 7th military division. It is 
necessary that you give me a work in order on this subject, after having concerted with General 
Miollis, General Vignolle, the Grand Duchess, Prince Borghese, Marshal Perignon and General 
Bertrand. 

General Bertrand, in the event of an attack on Venice, could furnish a column of 2 or 
3,000 men, which would support the Piave. It would be necessary that the King of Bavaria be 
warned by General Vignolle, he would not fail to send 3 or 4,000 men by Trent. 

If, on the other hand, the Tyrol rebelled, General Bertrand would send to Lienz 2 or 3,000 
men, General Vignolle would send 8,000 to 9,000 men to Trent, the Bavarians would send a 
dozen thousand men through Salzburg; which would make nearly 24,000 men, who would be 
quickly reunited in the Tyrol. 

What seems to me to be wanting in Italy are French artillery companies; there are no 
Palmanova, Mantua or Venice; we must inform the means of sending. 

The 4th Battalion of the 8th Light is at Zara; this battalion has 200 patients, so that it has 
only 550 men present. Get a company of 150 men from Geneva to complete it. 

I have approved that you should make Illyria the 3rd battalion of the 23rd of the line, 
which will form four French battalions or 3,000 men in the Illyrian provinces; the fourth Italian 
light there are three battalions; which makes seven. There will therefore be in the Illyrian 
provinces, independently of the Croats, seven battalions of the line. 

Send General Miollis to make Gier, as and when he can, all he can on the 4th Italian 
Light, so that this regiment has a strength of 2,400 men. 

There are in Illyria two companies of Italian artillery, which are only 60 men; Ask 
General Vignolle to complete them to 120 men. The two French artillery companies are 
complete with 120 men. 

I would not be far from passing Trieste the 4th Battalion of the 3rd Light, which is at 
Parma, as soon as the cohorts of National Guards of the 28th Military Division are formed. 

The 5th battalion of the 10th of the line, which is at Placentia, must receive men and be of 
real utility soon.” 


422 


Page 423 


I believe that General Bertrand must always hold in the Tyrol, on the side of Lienz, a 
thousand French and Croat men. 

There are still in the 27th and 28th military divisions the 4th battalion of the 7th, which is 
organized and whose organization must be squeezed; the 4th battalion of the 42nd; the 3rd 
battalion of the 67th, which arrived from Spain; the 4th battalion of the 101st; finally the Swiss 
regiment. It seems to me that the 4th battalion of the 7th could be joined to the 15th provisional 
demi-brigade, and the 3rd battalion from the 67th to the 14th. The 4th battalion of the 42nd, the 
Ath of the. 101st and the Swiss regiment could form a new brigade, to which it would be 
necessary to complete it only men. 

Make me a report on the different parts of this dispatch, which I dictate from memory, 
and present me a project of organization. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18717. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden, May 23, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, write to Marshal Perignon, who commands at Naples, that it is almost 
certain that he will be attacked before the end of the summer; that it is necessary, therefore, that 
the cavalry should be actively engaged in organizing cavalry, arranging light and foot artillery 
batteries, recruiting cadres, and training new ones; that I think it is indispensable that there 
should be in the kingdom of Naples 50,000 men and 4,000 horses, and sixty to seventy: pieces of 
cannon; that General Grenier's corps is included in this strength; that to have sixty to ten or 
eighty pieces of drawn cannon, it requires more than 300 wagons, which requires 1,500 to 2,000 
horses of the train; that it is necessary that there be two spare batteries of pieces of 12 and 
howitzers; that it will be only the great activity which the queen will put in her armaments and 
the aspect of the respectable state of defense where the kingdom will be placed which will 
impose on the enemy; that I would desire that 500 Neapolitan horses and two batteries, one on 
horseback of six pieces and the other on foot of eight pieces, forming fourteen pieces of cannon, 
should be joined to the corps of General Grenier; that it is my intention that General Grenier 
should remain in his present cantonments and in healthy places, ready, according to events, to go 
to Home, to Ancona, or to Florence. Write the same thing to General Grenier. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war.” 





423 


Page 424 


18718. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, A PARIS. 
Dresden. May 23, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the Ist battalion of the 52nd has 233 men in La Spezia; Join these men, 
who are now useless in La Spezia. The Ist battalion of this regiment is 600 men strong, the 2nd 
battalion 500 men, the 3rd 500 men, the 4th 500 men: I want the five battalions of the 52nd are 
gathered in Genoa. Let me know if this regiment could provide three battalions of six companies 
each of 150 strong, which would make a regiment of 2,700 men, and what would remain to the 
Ath and 5th battalions. I would like to withdraw this regiment from Genoa only when the 
organization of the 82nd, 83rd, 84th and 85th cohorts of Piedmont and Genoa is about to be 
advanced. 

I wish to be informed of what is going on at Naples, in order to issue orders to the 
Neapolitan division before it has passed Verona, if I see that provision is made to repair the 
losses by a new recruitment and that it there is nothing to fear. Moreover, the work which I ask 
you, by my letters of this day, on the battalions which are available in Italy, will put me in a 
position to judge whether I should summon the Neapolitan division, which will always be useful 
on the rear of the Great Army. The 4th battalion of the 52nd is, I believe, composed of former 
soldiers of the conscription of 1811; I would not be far from joining him to the first three. I think 
I asked you to write to the Grand Duchess to assemble the 112th in healthy places; For lack of 
this care, the regiments are lost. My intention is that, after the 1st of June, there will be no native 
troupe from beyond the Alps in the bad parts of Tuscany, from the State of Rome, from Naples, 
in the vicinity of the Po, to Mantua, to Palmanova. Neapolitans, foreign battalions, must serve in 
these countries. Reiterate the order that the French troops be placed on the heights and in healthy 
positions. This provision is of the utmost importance. Hold on to the execution, and have 
someone from your office review the situation reports and make sure that my orders are 
executed. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.*~* 


424 


Page 425 


18719. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY IN DRESDEN. 


Dresden, May 23, 1812. 


Cousin, send an officer to the viceroy at once to inform him that the provisions contained 
in his letter of May 10 are bad. Pultusk, Ostrolcenka, Rozan and even Przasnycz are to be 
occupied by the 5th Corps, which feeds on Warsaw. He must support the left of the 4th corps at 
the Dreweuz, and the right at most at Wyszogrod. He would then have to feed the handling of 
Thorn, that of Plock and that of Wyszogrod. He must have been ordered to stand in columns on 
the road from Plock to Willenberg; it can be placed on three columns, if it thinks it suitable; one 
from Lipno to Rypin and Lautenburg, one from Plock to Soldau, and the third from Wyszogrod 
to Plonsk and Mlawa. But the whole country from the line of Wyszogrod, Plonsk and Mlawa to 
the Narew must be at the disposal of the 5th corps. The Wkra can be the dividing line. Make it 
very clear to the Viceroy that he must keep his masses near the Vistula, since Wyszogrod, Plock 
and Thorn are abundantly supplied places and where there is a large quantity of food. 

Write in the same direction to the Duke of Elchingen and the King of Westphalia. 


NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18720. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 23, 1812. 


Cousin, write to General Rapp that you have put before me the letter of May 9th; that I 
saw there vessels of three kinds; that those of the first species only go from Konigsberg or Elbing 
to Pillau and from there to the Baltic (it seems that these vessels are numerous, but General Rapp 
does not make known what exists in Konigsberg), that those of the second kind are fifty-four; 
that these are vessels which make the navigation of Frische Haff, but which they can not reach, 
as far as Danzig; that finally the vessels of the third kind are those which can sail, from 
Konigsberg to Danzig; that their number is only forty-two, which can go without unloading from 
Danzig to Konigsberg, and that these forty-two vessels can not*”° 


425 


Page 426 


carry together only 30,000 quintals. General Rapp does not make known the tonnage of the fifty- 
four vessels of the second kind, nor how much this number of vessels could carry; but in general 
it must be a small thing, and even if these vessels bear 60,000, that would be very unsatisfactory. 
It is true that the number of vessels of the first kind is not determined; if there are many, it should 
be stopped as many as possible; and, as there must be sufficient vessels in the Vistula to go from 
Danzig to Elbing, the service thus shared could always be done. Whenever we have boats of the 
third kind that can go from Danzig to Konigsberg, we would prefer them. When we do not have 
one, we would first load on boats from the Vistula, which would transport to Elbing, and there 
the cargo would pass on boats of the second and even the first kind. Lastly, it is necessary to 
have sufficient boats to transport two or three hundred thousand Danzig to Koenigsberg, either 
by breaking the load at Elbing or without breaking the charge. It is my intention, therefore, that 
General Rapp assemble in council the two cons-admirals, engineers, and the principal boatmen 
of the country, and that he should take their advice on the following questions: 

How many vessels are there to go from Danzig to Konigsberg? how much do they wear? 
could we increase the number? are there in Danzig any vessels which, with a slight reparation, 
could be made fit for this service, so that the transport of Danzig to Koenigsberg could be 
effected without breaking the load at Elbing? How many boats are there to go from Danzig to 
Elbing? how much can they wear? how many days do they need to go back and forth? How 
many boats can go from Elbing to Konigsberg? and how many days does it take for this trip? Is it 
advisable to repair the lighters at Danzig and send them empty to Elbing to increase the transport 
from Elbing to Konigsberg? or are there enough already? 

I should also get information on this other question: What vessels could go from 
Konigsberg to the Niemen and up the river? what should their dimensions be? Do they have 
locks to cross? I guess there will be enough of these boats. 

It is of the utmost importance that the boats do not fail and that this navigation is done 
under the direction of the naval officers. Rear-Admiral Dumanoir will be responsible for all the 
details of the service from Danzig to Konigsberg. Rear Admiral Baste*”° 


426 


Page. 427 


will be placed at Konigsberg and will be in charge of the same service in Frische-Haff and in all 
the communication channels of Konigsberg at Niemen. It is necessary that these two cons- 
admirals concert the organization of their service and report it to you. They must have naval 
officers everywhere, and seamen placed on all the vessels should shelter us from the bad will of 
the boatmen of the country. You will send a copy of my letter to the Intendant General. You will 
also send him to Prince Eckmiihl, who, being on the spot, will be able to take information from 
his side. 

Three highway engineers arrive from Russia. I gave an order to detain them; they will be 
attached to this service. It is necessary that you have at the general district a naval officer to 
follow the correspondence and the details of this service. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18721. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 24, 1812. 


My cousin, you will let General Heudelet know that my intention is to have his 
headquarters at Miinster and to correspond with the commander of the 32nd Military Division, 
with that of Mecklenburg, with the governor of Mecklenburg, with the general commanding the 
31st division, with the commander of the 17th division and with the minister of war of the 
kingdom of Westphalia; he will be under the orders of the Duke of Bellune, who is at Berlin, and 
commands all my troops between the Rhine and the Vistula. General Heudelet has under his 
command the 2nd division of the reserve, composed of the 6th demi-brigade, strong of 4 
battalions; of the 7th demi-brigade, strong of 4 battalions; the 8th demi-brigade, strong of 4 
battalions; the 9th demi-brigade, strong of 4 battalions; of the 17th demi-brigade, strong of 4 
battalions; total, 20 battalions. He also has under his command the brigade which meets at Erfurt 
and is composed of six battalions; which makes a total of 26 battalions. My intention is that he 
send the 7th demi-brigade without delay to garrison Hamburg; the 6th to garrison in 
Mecklenburg: the 8th to garrison Bremen; the 9th to garrison at Miinster, and the 17th at 
Osnabruck, that these troops should serve the coast only in case of extraordinary events; that they 
must be kept together in the cities, to facilitate their formation*”’ 





427 


Page 428 


and their instruction; that General Heudelet must traverse their different garrisons to make them 
maneuver; that the two battalions of Prince Primate, remaining in the 32nd military division, will 
be sufficient for the service of the coast and what is called the service of the division; that finally 
this division of twenty battalions of the reserve must be there only to form, organize and put 
itself in a position to enter the line. 

The Confederation Regiment No. 6, which is in Hamburg, will travel to the 31st Military 
Division, where it will raise the three battalions of the 125th, which will join the 12th Division in 
Berlin. Regiment No. 4 will leave Hamburg at once for Swedish Pomerania. With the arrival of 
the 6th demi-brigade in Mecklenburg, the Hesse-Darmstadt regiment of guards will join the 
headquarters at Marienburg, to be attached to the headquarters and serve. Finally the other troops 
of Hesse who are in Mecklenburg will join their corps in Swedish Pomerania, and General 
Daendels will reunite the whole brigade of Berg at Stettin, removing even what this corps has 
garrisoned at Kiistrin. 

You will make known to General Heudelet that if a descent took place in Holland at 
Delfzyl, at Hamburg, or in Swedish Pomerania, he would have to go there at once with his 
twenty-six battalions; that if any insurrection were to take place in Westphalia or on any other 
point, it would be necessary to have the Erfurt reserve there, and the forces it would have at 
Minster, where it is my intention to send the 17th demi-brigade to keep a garrison at Magdeburg, 
but I await, before giving this order, that I have been made aware of the formation of this demi- 
brigade and the arrival of the battalions of the 126th, 127th, 128th, and 129th, which must be late 
now. General Heudelet must be informed that 10,000 Danes must, in case of descent, cooperate 
with him; that eight 4th squadrons of dragoons must march for Hanover; that they will at first be 
composed of only 800 men, but that successively they will be increased to 2,000 horses; that this 
cavalry must be part of his division. The 32nd Division must have two cannon batteries. It is 
necessary that two other batteries are attached to. the Heudelet division. I wrote to the Minister 
of War and I reiterate the order. 

Thus General Heudelet will have in his hand twenty-six battalions, forming 18,000 men, 
2,000 cavalry and thirty pieces of cannon. Two brigadier generals and a warrant officer will be 
needed. In, therefore, assuming that in the current*® 


428 


Page 429 


in July, the Swedes, the English or even the Russians were trying something, he would be able to 
resist them. 

Order General Michaud, commander at Magdeburg, as soon as the head of Lagrange's 
division has arrived at Magdeburg, he will send the Westphalian regiment which is at 
Magdeburg to go to Glogau. 

Warn the Queen of Westphalia of the formation of the Erfurt Reserve and the 
organization of the Heudelet Division. 

Warn General Heudelet that he must make sure of himself that the citadel of Erfurt is 
armed, supplied and able to defend itself. 

You will share all these dispositions with the Marshal Duke of Bellune, the Heudelet 
division, being under his orders, 

With the arrival of Confederation Regiment No. 4, and Hesse-Darmstadt troops in 
Swedish Pomerania. the whole brigade of Berg, now composed of five battalions, and which will 
soon be augmented by two others, must meet at Stettin, in order to be able to set in motion on the 
Vistula, or to be there as soon as the first division of the reserve. At the orders of General 
Lagrange, will have arrived at Magdeburg, You will make it clear to the Duke of Bellune that I 
desire that the 9th corps may in the course of June move to the Vistula. He will be replaced by 
the Ist, 2nd. 3rd and 4th divisions of the reserve, Warn all of these orders the Minister of War, 
especially because he quickly organizes two artillery batteries for division Heudelet. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18722. - TO GENERAL DUROSNEL. 
EMPEROR'S AIDE DE CAMP, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden; May 24, 1812. 


Count Durosnel, you will find herewith a copy of a memorial of General Rapp on the 
means of water transport from Danzig to Konigsberg. I also give you a copy of the reply which I 
instruct the Major General to make to General Rapp, Go to Danzig; you will see the principal 
boatmen, the marine engineers, and the two cons - admirals, and you will bring me a detailed 
report on all the questions put in my letter to the major - general. See for yourself if my orders 
relating to the embarkation of siege crews, boarding of*” 





429 


Page 430. 


Deck crews and engineers and the embarkation of supplies were executed, if everything went, 
and if everything will be returned to Elbing on 1 June. Also see if the first deck crew, well 
hitched up, spun on Elbing, and what are the resources of the 2nd and 3rd deck crews in gear, 
personnel and hitches; lastly, see all that may be of interest to my service to Danzig, whether for 
the siege crew or the reserve crew, or for the supplies of engineers and artillery. See everything 
in detail and bring me information about everything. You will pass to Elbing to make sure that 
all the objects that were directed at Elbing have arrived there, and that, if they had to be 
unloaded, they are already re-embarked on other vessels suitable for the navigation of the 
Frische-Haff. wait for new orders in Danzig. 
NAPOLEON 
According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18723. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden, May 26, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I reply to your letter of the 18th, by which you account for the 
recruitment of cohorts of National Guards; but you do not make me forget to read the brigade 
generals whom you have charged with the command of each brigade, which is very important, 
since each brigade must have a chief who presides over his organization, which corresponds with 
you for the vacant places, and who takes care of his instruction. 

Take care that the brigade composed of the 55th, 56th, 57th, 58th, and the 18th and 19th 
cohorts, that; must meet in Utrecht, be divided between Utrecht, Arnheim and Nijmegen; that it 
be placed in healthy places; that it does not do any service on the coasts under any pretext 
whatsoever, unless a landing of enemies; otherwise, these six cohorts, composed of men born in 
the heart of France, will be reduced to nothing. 

Cohorts composed of Belgians, belonging to the 3rd brigade, must serve the coast and 
unhealthy places, as acclimatized. The cohort composed of old Frenchmen must not be placed in 
these parts; it must be placed in Bruges and even in Ghent. It is necessary to place in Ostende, 
which is an unhealthy country, the Belgian cohort. If the institutions can not contain the cohorts 
that will not be placed on the island of Cadzand, we can put two**” 





430 


Page 431 


in Ghent. The commander of the brigade will reside in Bruges, where he will be able to move the 
different cohorts according to the events. One could even dispense with sending cohorts to 
Cudzand before November, and leave the Scheldt cohort, which would be abolished only in 
November. 

The brigade of five cohorts which is organized at Lille, which is to keep garrison at 
Mechlin, must extend to Brussels and occupy only the healthy places. I do not like to see cohort 
in Breda, Brussels, on the contrary, is healthy. It is sufficient if the general who commands these 
five cohorts resides in Mechelen and is authorized to unite them at the slightest movement; they 
will have more latitude and will benefit from existing institutions. The surroundings of Brussels, 
Mechelen, Louvain, Antwerp, the beautiful village of Saint-Nicolas, can very well contain the 
brigade of Lille and that of Besancon. 

I wish you to give me a picture of the formation of the brigades, the generals designated 
for the brigades, and the place occupied by each. 

Attach it to the spirit of the order I dictated, and depart from the letter. One or two days 
apart are nothing when it comes to the health of the troops; healthy countries first and foremost. 
What is the use of sick men, who can not do anything when the enemy presents himself? 

I recommend especially the cohorts of J'ancienne France, which I manage on Antwerp 
and Utrecht. Go into the smallest details, and seriously take care of placing them in extremely 
healthy countries. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18721: - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 26, 1812. 


Cousin, send to the Prince d'Eckmiihl that it is ridiculous to think of building a jetty on 
the Pillau side, and to dispose of large vessels laden with stones; that to-day that I am in the 
army, such things ought not to be done without my order, that it is enough to have good batteries 
at the two points, and that the English will not rub it; to place three mortars on each side, 
independently of the 24 pieces; that it may not be inconvenient to take a large vessels in 
Konigsberg and install it” 


431 


Page 432 


as a pontoon; and still the distance from the Nehrung to Pillau being only 3,000 toises, it seems 
useless; that we must not attempt things that make us ridiculous. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18725. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT ELBING. 
Dresden, May 26, 1812. 


My Cousin, the Major General, has made known to you my intentions for the movement 
of your army corps. Everything is subordinated to the arrival of the deck crew, because all my 
campaign plan is based on the existence of this well-braced deck crew as mobile as a piece of 
cannon. I gave orders that he had arrived on the Ist at Elbing; I hope that it will be at least on the 
3rd. I suppose that the siege crew will also have arrived at Elbing and embarked on vessels 
suitable for Frische-Haff navigation. The powders and everything must be there, but it is less ina 
hurry than the deck crew; if, therefore, this crew needed a few hundred horses and could not be 
obtained from Nogat Island, I would prefer a few wagons of your second supply to remain 
unhitched. I can not recommend that you take the most effective measures to keep as little 
baggage as possible, and that all the clothes, shoes and saddles that the corps have with them 
should be sent to Marienburg and Danzig, so that all caissons can be used and loaded with flours, 
bread, rice, vegetables and spirits, except what is necessary for ambulances. The result of all my 
movements will bring together 400,000 men on one point; there will be nothing then to hope for 
the country, and it will have everything to have with you. Luggage left behind can be returned 
after the first shipment. 

The pass of Pillau is only 600 toises in width; batteries set up on both sides will cross 
their balls at 300 fathoms, and, by adding some mortars and howitzers, not one boat will pass. 
Booming ideas are ridiculous; it would be more convenient to build at Pillau three or four 
buildings forming gunboats and able to lend the flank to a frigate and go to sea. I will see that 
when I am at Danzig. I will arrive on the 29th at Posen, the 31st at Thorn, the 2nd at Marienburg, 
and the 3rd at Danzig. Do not say anything about it; it's only for you alone. As soon as I saw 
Danzig and** 





432 


Page 433 


that I will be assured of important things, I intend to enter the field, and the army will move 
everywhere. You have badly enough alarmed Prussia for Pillau. It's simple. We must first detach 
the Prussian corps. I intend to form a 10th corps of the Prussians and of the 7th Division, and to 
give the command to the Duke of Taranto. 

It will be difficult for me to see the bodies in detail, other than on the battlefield and in 
the lost moments. However, prepare the replacement statements, including the service records of 
each officer, so that I can finish the job in a moment. The way I see the corps is too tiring and 
takes too much time, I will be able to see them in the lost moments. 

I have here the Emperor of Austria, the Empress, the King of Prussia, the Prince Royal, 
many princes, and many people. 

The Ist Austrian Army Corps, commanded by the Prince of Schwarzenberg, meets at 
Lemberg and goes on the march. He is 35,000 strong. I guess all your furnace builders are at the 
forefront. Those of the Duke of Reggio have orders to establish a handling at Guttstadt; those of 
the Duke of Elchingen at Osterode; those of the viceroy at Willenberg, and those of the 5th corps 
at Pultusk and Ostrolenka. Tighten your light cavalry on your left, since that of the 2nd corps 
occupies Guttstadt. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18726. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE BIG ARMY, PLOCK. 
Dresden, May 26, 1812, 


My Son, the Major General, will have made known to you the movement which you must 
execute to your army corps, which must be formed in three columns. You must have, on the 6th, 
your headquarters at Soldau, you will not stay there long, my intention being to open the 
campaign without delay. I'll be on the 30th at Posen. I wish to know by one of your officers that 
you will send me there the situation of your army corps. General Poniatowski will occupy 
Modlin and be on your right at Sierock and Pultusk; the Duke of Elchingen, on his left, will have 
his headquarters at Osterode, occupy Allenstein and Hohenstein, and join with your light cavalry. 
It is possible that from the 7th to the 8th I give you orders to march on Rastenburg, Loeitz, & c. 
Let the geographers know the roads*** 





433 


Page 434 


in the direction of Ortelsburg, Sensburg, L6tzen, Rhein, Arys and even Johaunisburg, Push the 
most, food you can on Willenberg. Place on your left the French, that is to say the 4th corps, the 
Bavarians on the right. Find out if you can find some resources near Rastenburg. You must have 
with you for twenty days of food, and your convoys quickly go in the direction of Plock, 
Ulyszogrod, Lipno and even Thorn. I do not speak of cavalry, it will be able to subsist. At this 
moment we find new fodder. You will keep the secret on this later movement. Make believe, on 
the contrary, that you will march on Warsaw. My headquarters will be at 1 June in Thorn and 
immediately after at Osterode. 

I suppose that you have grinded the wheat with the greatest activity, and that from 10,000 
quintals you have increased your flour supplies to 20,000 quintals. The whole army will 
eventually be reunited on the same field; every corps huddled together will soon exhaust the 
resources of the country: only the grass will remain. Have oxen, brandy, pulses, rice, etc .; do not 
wear clothing or harness; take it all to Plock and put a good officer to drive it. Decrease the load 
of your vans, it will be necessary for the transport of the biscuit; besides, we must expect to be 
harassed by the Cossacks. Send Willenberg ahead of time, have a nice seven to eight furnace 
built there. Once the movement begins, your communication route will be through Thorn, for 
both the 6th and the 4th corps. I will raise Plock's bridge as soon as it is deemed useless. Take 
effective means to gather at Willenberg all you can from flour, wheat, cattle, & c. Always have a 
company of builders of ovens, bakers, sappers, etc., to establish your handling before your 
arrival in Rastenburg and other places where you must take a stand. 

Has your oxen transport battalion arrived, as well as General Guyon's Corps? Are the 
troops incorporated? The cadres of the 5th battalions must be sent back to Italy. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg.**4 


434 


Page 435 


18727. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE Sth, 7th AND 8th COPRS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN WARSAW. 
Dresden. May 26, 1812. 


My Brother, the Major General has made known to you my intentions for the movement 
to be carried out, from the 5th to the 6th of June, by the 5th, 7th and 8th Corps. The Intendant 
General has given orders for the re-establishment of the handling of Pultusk, Ostrolenka and 
Przasnycz, and to make flour on Pultusk, Makow, Przasnyez, Ostrolenka and Praga. 

The commander of the engineers will have given orders to bridge Pultusk, to raise the 
bridgehead, to arm it and restore the batteries which, from the right bank, defend the left, to 
restore the bridgeheads and the redoubts which had been established at the intersection of Narew 
and Bug. 

It is necessary that you establish on the Bug a bridge to communicate easily in the 
peninsula. This bridge should be as close as possible to Praga, at a point, however, where 
communication with Pultusk is not hampered by swamps and easy. 

It is essential that your movement be done in such a way that the advanced cavalry posts 
are not disturbed, and that what is in front of the enemy remains in its positions, because the war 
is not declared so as to prevent communication on enemy borders. The Grand Duchy must have 
customs which have orders to leave nothing of the Grand Duchy in Russia, receiving all that 
would happen. 

Hold a staff officer vis-a-vis Brzesc at the outlets. The bridges on the Narew and the Bug 
must be such that the bodies can easily communicate with each other. I recommend you the 
bridgehead of Pultusk and Sierock on the Narew and the Bug, because it would be possible that, 
in a second movement, I leave the master enemy of the country since the glacis of Praga, 
contenting myself with to preserve Praga, Modlin, the left bank of the Vistula, and the right bank 
of the Narew, from Modlin to Sierock, and thence, according to the circumstances, I would also 
abandon the peninsula and hold myself at the right bank of the Narew to Hozan and Ostrolenka; 
or I'll keep Bug from Sierock to Brok. It is, therefore, fitting that the bridge which you will 
establish on the peninsula should be as near as possible to Sierock. As for the Sierock Bridge, as 
it is supplemented by that of Modlin, one could be content with the Bug Bridge and the Pultusk 
Bridge over the Narew, and remove the Sierock Bridge.**° 





435 


Page 436 


(if it became necessary and of no value) located at Nieporent, that is, placed on both banks 
together. 

It will be fitting that after making your arrangements you go to Sierock, Pultusk, 
Ostrolenka, the banks of the Omulew, and that you come to Brok. Leaks recognize the small 
river Liwiec, which could serve as an outpost in case the outposts were too close to the Bug. 

Order Lublin 100,000 rations of biscuit bread, and spread the noise of your arrival on this 
side with 100,000 men. You must make all the demonstrations to make believe that you will 
meet with the Austrians with 100,000 men; but the truth is that your movement will be reversed, 
which I confide to you only for you alone, and what I desire you to keep very secret, without 
even communicating it to your chief of staff. 

The 4th Cavalry Corps, which is to carry its headquarters to one or two Praga marches, 
may push light cavalry to the Bug to observe the enemy's movements. It is necessary that the big 
cavalry does not exceed the Liwiec. This corps will always be able to maneuver according to my 
general projects and to approach the Bug and the Narew, if I judge it suitable. Place General 
Latour-Maubourg's headquarters near Stanislawow, where he will be able to watch the path of 
Brzesc. 

Let me know how many pontoons you have to your three corps. Have with you twenty 
days of provisions in biscuit and biscuit bread, flour, dirty touching the general stores. 

It is possible that on the 6th of June I begin warlike movements, without, however, being 
at war, since I have six or eight days' march on the territory of Prussia or the Grand Duchy. 

The bread which you will have made at Lublin, for your pretended movement on this 
point, may be of use to the Austrian corps, which I will probably have to tighten to my right. 
Maneuver and place your positions of light cavalry as if you were going to Volhynia. Send spies 
on this side, and have your accommodation prepared in Lublin, 

No one should be in your confidence, not even your Chief of Staff. 

NAPOLEON 


According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. Prince Jerome.*”° 





436 


Page 437 


18728. -NOTE 
FOR THE MINISTER OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 27, 1812. 


The Duke of Bassano will discuss this note with the Chancellor (1). He will make him 
understand that, as a politician, I trust Prussia, and that it would be absurd not to trust it; but that, 
as a soldier, I can not leave the places of Pillau and Spandau in other hands than mine, and that I 
must be master to change the garrison every day and whenever I judge it fit; that my first feeling 
had been to ask for the surrender of these places by the treaty, but that it would have been a 
dishonorable clause for Prussia; that the two places are besides very little, and that I find that the 
bias which I took is the most suitable; that there is one simple thing to do for Pillau, is that the 
king increases his army of the 2,000 men of the garrison of that place; that then, this place being 
without garrison, when we advance forward, I will put in it the one which will suit; that these 
2,000 men will please General Grawert and the whole Prussian army, who will prefer to be a 
little stronger than a little weaker, and that this arrangement will remove all difficulty; that, as to 
Kolberg's place, it is necessary that the general who commands there, independently of the 
garrison necessary for the defense of that place which is to remain in his precincts, should have 
at his disposal mobile columns with artillery for to enlighten the country and oppose a landing, 
yielding only to major forces and withdrawing to Kolberg fort. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Foreign Affairs Archives. 


18729. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden, May 27, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, there are in the kingdom of Italy more than 30,000 men of infantry and 
2,000 horses. 

The first active division commanded by General Fresia, whose headquarters are at 
Treviso, is composed of two brigades, namely: General Schill's brigade, composed of four 
battalions of the 13th of the line, strong of 3,000 men, and two gun, placed at Udine; and General 
Zucchi's brigade, consisting of four 





1) M. de Hardenberg, Chancellor of Prussia.*°” 


437 


Page 438 


battalions of the 5th of the Italian line, a battalion of the 1st of the line, and a battalion of the 7th 
of the Italian line, which makes six battalions or 4,000 men, placed at Padua. This division, with 
the 3rd Italian artillery company, 160 horses of the train hitching six pieces of cannon, and the 
Ath regiment of Italian hunters, 600 horses strong, presents a force of 8,000 men. Warn of the 
existence of this division General Bertrand, so that, if Trieste was threatened, this division could 
be brought to his aid. Order at the same time that a squadron of the 4th Italian fighter be placed 
closer to Trieste. 

With these provisions, Trieste and Illyria have nothing to fear. It is important that General 
Bertrand and the generals who command this division get on well together, so as not to wait for 
orders from Milan. 

The 2nd active division commanded by General Barbou is composed of a brigade, 
consisting of a battalion of the 4th Italian regiment, a battalion of the 6th, a squadron of the Ist 
Italian fighter and a squadron of the Napoleon dragoons. The 4th battalion of the 6th Italian is at 
Sinigaglia. Let General Barbou master leave him there, or even put him in Mantua, if he deems it 
necessary. 

The 2nd Brigade of the 2nd Active Division is composed of two battalions of the 112th 
which the Grand Duchess sends to Bologna, whence they will be ready to go to Ancona or to 
such other part of Italy as might be threatened. 

This division must be able to go to Rome, Venice, Ancona or Genoa, depending on the 
circumstances. 

Independently of these forces, the places have their garrison; Palmanova has 1,500 men; 
Venice, 4,200; Legnago, 700; Mantua, 3,000 men, etc. 

Trieste seems to me much too bald, since two French battalions and the three Italian 
battalions are in Dalmatia and Ragusa. It would be good to have a French battalion in Trieste. 
Before the 23rd league has arrived, which may be long, order General Schill to send a French 
battalion of the 13th line; which, joined to the squadron of the 4th chasseurs, which will be 
placed on Isonzo, and to the Croats, will place this place safe from any insult. Also send to 
Trieste two French artillery companies of the 3rd regiment, each of 120 strong, to assure this 
important point. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy. Deposit of the war.*** 


438 


Page 439 


18730. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden. May 27, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, send to Bayonne, to increase the reserve of General Lhuillier, the 3rd and 
the 105th, who were ordered to go to Nantes. 

As soon as the 5th provisional demi-brigade, composed of the 6th battalions of the 26th, 
66th and 82nd, and 3rd battalion of the 121st fort of more than 200 men, will be organized, you 
will direct this demi-brigade on Bayonne, where it will increase the reserve, since there are in the 
12th division the cohorts which meet at La Rochelle, which are sufficient for the guard of the 
islands and coasts. 

Order General Dumuy as soon as the cohorts are dressed he employs them in the defense 
of the islands and the coast of Provence, so that we have nothing to fear from the attempts of the 
enemy. 

Also give orders to General Miollis that as soon as his cohort is formed he will use them 
to garnish the most important points of the coast. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18731. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, TO DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 27, 1812. 


Cousin, I ordered the general of artillery to assemble in Elbing, well hitched, two deck 
crews, and to have them driven in the first days about the height of Tilsit, as well as all that is 
necessary in ropes, anchors, etc., for the construction of a third bridge with the boats and the 
woods of the country; the existence of three bridges is therefore ensured. The engineer must also 
have three bridges on stilts, ropes and irons for two, whole woods for one, with bells and other 
utensils to be able to build them quickly. My intention is that you give orders to the engineers 
that these crews be shipped without delay and go to Elbing, where they can follow the 
movements of the army. It is important that in the first days of June all this be gathered and en 
route. Write to the commander of the engineers to get along with the governor of Gdansk for 
embarkation and departure at all. By this means, I will have for the Niemen three boat bridges 
and moreover three piling bridges.” 





439 


Page 440 


Give orders to the King of Westphalia, the Viceroy, the Duke of Elchingen, the Duke of 
Reggio, and the Prince of Eckmiihl to send you without delay the stall of all the boats, boats, 
tackle, etc. who are following their army corps. It is also necessary that the Poles harness what 
they have of these crews. Ask the commander of the engineers the condition of the boats, ropes, 
bells, etc., which are with the companies of the engineer's train, so that I have all my means on 
this object. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18732.-TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 27, 1812. 


My cousin, order the governor of Danzig to assemble the vice-admirals, the best captains 
and practical pilots, in order to know exactly the draft of the pass of Pillau and Frische Haff, and 
the ordinary course of the navigation of this gulf and the canals of Danzig and Konigsberg. I 
wish to be presented with a project to build on one of the Frische Haff points war-ships capable 
of defending the Frische Haff, the Pillau pass, and even the sea at Pillau. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18733. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 21, 1812. 


Cousin, send an officer to Kiistrin to wait for the arrival of General Roguet, and order him to 
arrive on the Vistula by the shortest way and the most possible lot. You will let this general 
know that the headquarters will go to Osterode; that his division, in passing the Vistula, must go 
to Guttstadt, and take several directions, so that his division may arrive at once, that he may 
consult the forces of his troops, so as not to tire them, and consider at the same time At the 
beginning of June, when the army was to enter into great military operations on the Pregel, it 
would be nice if his division could arrive early. The officer you will send will bring back 
General Roguet's answer, his itinerary day by day and step by step, so that we always know 
where this division is.“° 





440 


Page 441 


Your officer will also inquire about the siege crew traveling from Magdeburg to Kiistrin, 
the amount of ammunition arriving from Magdeburg to Kiistrin, and what has already happened. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18734.-INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ARCHBISHOP OF MALINES (1), 
AMBASSADOR OF THE EMPEROR TO THE DUKE OF WARSAW, 
Dresden, May 28, 1812. 


The King of Saxony, by his decree of the 26th of this month, has created a kind of special 
government of the Duchy of Warsaw, and has conferred on him extraordinary powers for all that 
concerns the administration. 

It is with the Duke of Warsaw, and especially with the government, that he has invested 
with his authority, that the Archbishop of Malines will have to exercise his functions with the 
character of ambassador of the Emperor, 

This government resides in a council of ministers. 

The Council of Ministers was created by Article 8 of the Constitution; he has a president 
appointed by the king out of the members of the ministry. Business is discussed in this council to 
be presented to the King for approval. Such is its constitutional existence, and such are its 
attributions according to the constitution. 

Its existence and powers have been extended by the decree of the King, which confers 
upon it, in cases of urgency which present circumstances may present, all the full power 
conferred on the King by the constitutional statute. 

The exercise of this authority must be determined according to the present circumstances 
and according to the circumstances to come. 

In the present circumstances, the council must rule on all matters relating to the 
administration, and refer to the requests which will be made to it for the interest of the 
maintenance or the preservation of the allied armies. 

As for the maintenance of the allied armies, the first task which it must endeavor to 
complete with activity is to form stores and use all the means of the country to make the 
resources which it presents the subsistence of troops and the good state of all services, 

As for the preservation of the armies, it must take all the measures of high police which 
would be required for this purpose. He must also 





1)These instructions, signed by the Duke of Bassano, Minister of Foreign Relations, were 
dictated by the Emperor.“ 





441 


Page 442 


pay particular attention and zeal to all matters relating to the proper organization, recruitment, 
completion, arming, equipment and maintenance of all the corps and services of the Army of the 
Duchy. 

The ambassador of the Emperor to this government has given a first duty and an 
immediate duty to fulfill is to procure the execution of all that matters to the maintenance and 
preservation of the allied armies. He must, for this purpose, enter into all the details of the 
administration of the Duchy, of which it is proper that no one should be a stranger to him. It must 
support all the requests that will be made by the French military authorities and procure the 
quickest execution. He must correspond on this subject with the major-general of the army and 
with the generals commander-in-chief of the corps which compose it. 

The circumstances to come, during which the Council of Ministers will have to exercise 
its authority, are those which will procure for Poland its re-establishment as a nation, and the 
union of the members of this body politic who have been separated by violence. 

The council of ministers will give the first impulse, in summoning the diet by a 
proclamation; he has the power, since the king has delegated to him all his. 

The Diet convened, the Confederation of Poland will leave from its bosom and according 
to the mode of execution which will be indicated hereafter. The council of ministers will not 
have a necessarily active part in the insurrection; he must favor it with all his influence, with all 
his means; he must above all devote himself particularly to the administration and fulfill the 
important and difficult task of maintaining order in the midst of the insurrection itself, of 
regulating the levies, the armaments, the perception and the use of the resources of the 
Confederate countries. The ambassador will exercise on this part of the functions of the Council 
of Ministers the same supervision and the same superior direction which the exercise is entrusted 
to him in the present situation of things. 

The developments in which we have just entered do not yet include the part of his 
functions for which the Emperor relies most on his activity, sagacity, and enlightenment. It is for 
all that is due to the recovery and confederation of Poland that he will have to make use of it, to 
respond to the views of the Emperor. 

His first care must be to consult the Poles who know Poland best, its history, its national 
character, the powerful men and the provisions of the provinces currently occupied by Russia. 
After hearing them and appreciating them, he will form a sort of committee which he will chair 
and which he will consult*” 


442 


Page 443 


on the most suitable measures and the steps to be taken to give a great impetus to the nation. He 
will form an opinion of his own, and he will be able to judge what must be preserved or modified 
in the plan to be drawn. 

The decree by which the king gave extraordinary powers to the council of ministers 
would be first published. He would already begin to fix the attention of the Poles on their future. 
The council of ministers would then convoke the diet, as has been said above, by a proclamation 
drawn up in such a manner as to excite in the highest degree public attention and curiosity. It 
would be advisable, if it were possible, that its opening should take place from the 10th to the 
15th. 

When the diet was convened, she might receive a petition of eight or ten of the most 
important personages of Poland by name and existence in the Russian provinces, such as Prince 
Adam Czartoryski, the eldest of the Radziwill, Prince Jahlonowski, etc., etc. This petition should 
be written in a style that is already making a strong impression. 

Motions would be made in the diet to demand that in the present circumstances of the 
country a committee, appointed in the heart of the diet, be charged with proposing the means by 
which they require the use. This committee should be composed of the most distinguished and 
influential men; he would make a long report on the misfortunes of Poland, on the hope of the 
revival of the country, etc.; he would propose to proclaim the existence of the kingdom of Poland 
and the body of the Polish nation, which the force alone could have destroyed. He would 
establish that wherever Poles are united they have, like their fathers, the right to confederate for 
the safety of their country. He would propose a decree to declare Poland restored and to 
constitute the diet in the confederation of Poland. 

The dieticians of the Duchy of Warsaw would at once be summoned to join the 
confederation. All mixed subjects, all subjects of the Russian provinces would be allowed to 
confederate. The dieticians of the provinces which are still occupied by the Russians, not being 
able to meet publicly, could join secretly and send their adhesion to Warsaw. 

The report of the diet committee should be European and Polish, but focusing on 
developing the low intrigues, the violence that caused the ruin of the Polish homeland; Prussia 
and Austria should be carefully guarded, who, far from being opposed, advance in advance to the 
events which are being prepared. The report would be entirely directed against Russia.“ 


443 


Page 444 


One of the first acts of confederation would be a reminder of Poles, officers or soldiers, 
who serve the Russians. 

At the moment when the diet confederates, it would appoint a marshal and a council of 
the confederation. This marshal and this council, whose choice is extremely important, would do 
a few days after their proclamation. 

The diet could also name various confederation committees in different palatinates. These 
committees would also make proclamations. 

The proclamations, the speeches of the members of the Diet, the declarations or 
manifestos of each Confederate, etc., would be printed published and profusely disseminated. 

These various measures and the other provisions which the more perfect knowledge of 
the country will put in the case of proposing must be taken in such a way as to strike the opinion 
strongly. It is not enough for a proclamation; it requires multiplied acts. Proclamations, dietary 
reports, motions of the deputies, and, if possible, as many speeches, declarations, and particulars 
as there are individual adhesions to confederation, are necessary at the same time. It is necessary, 
finally, to publish every day pieces of all characters, of all styles, tending to the same end, but 
addressing the various sentiments and spirits. Thus we will succeed in putting the whole nation 
into a sort of intoxication. 

The committees of the various Palatinates will send agents everywhere to peddle all the 
printed documents and to introduce them into all parts of Poland. The Russians can not occupy 
the immensity of the country. We must create intelligences on their rear establish foci of 
insurrection wherever they will not be in force, finally place them in a situation similar to that 
where the French army was in Spain and the Republican army in the time of the Vendée and the 
chouannerie. This movement must be easily printed, and must become general as soon as it is 
supported by a military event of some importance. It is necessary then that all Poland is stirred 
up and that it enters entirely in insurrection. The only precautions to be kept are relative to the 
provinces still Austrian. One must not be offended by an ally who goes in front of these 
operations. 

As ambassador, the archbishop of Mechelen must take no ostensible part in these 
movements; but he must see everything, know everything, direct everything, animate everything. 


When the confederation will be formed, it will send line deputation - 
Page 444 





444 


Page 445 


to the Emperor to present him confederate sword and ask him for his protection. The Emperor 
will answer the deputies by praising the feelings that animate the Poles. He will tell them that it 
is only to their zeal, to their efforts, to their patriotism, that they may owe the revival of their 
country, This measure, which the Emperor proposes to keep, indicates enough to his ambassador 
the attitude he must have and the conduct he must take. 

These developments are sufficient to make him acquainted with the three objects which 
the Emperor has in view, confiding to him the mission with which he is clothed, 

First object. To have at Warsaw a French embassy which, by its rank, existence, and 
house, dominates all the authorities, whether French or Polish, civil or military. A general 
officer, of whatever rank, would hardly have dominated the generals of his rank, the ministers 
and the great of the country. An ambassador will succeed with all the less difficulty because his 
political character, his rank in the ecclesiastical hierarchy and his personal character will impose 
more. His house must be a center where all classes, all interests will come to fruition. He will 
give to all the complaints, to all the revelations and even to all the councils a natural and suitable 
organ. 

Second object. The ambassador must exercise not only a great influence, but a real 
authority over the administration. He attends council meetings. His rank will not be disputed, 
since his character authorizes him to give way only to the crowned heads and princes of the 
blood. Thus placed, his influence will naturally be exercised with authority and without 
wounding any self-esteem. Nothing will prevent him from interfering in all the details: first, 
because he will see in all his steps the authority of the Emperor, and that all resistance would be 
useless; secondly, because he will not worry about anyone's ambition: He must take advantage of 
his position, as has already been established, so that the duchy may be as useful as it can be to 
the army, and that he may concur, by all the resources he can offer, with that war, the 
consequences of which will be so happy for Poland. The duchy had long called for a central 
authority; it exists for the country by the somewhat royal power of which the council of ministers 
is clothed; it exists especially by the presence of the ambassador, who will bring together, as it 
were, ministers, generals, commanders, authorizing officers, etc. 

The third object contains all that is due to the insurrection and confederation of Poland. 

There is another point on which it is advisable to enter some"? 


445 


Page 446 


details. Baron Bignon, resident of the Emperor, had established a service to obtain information 
on the composition, the state of situation, the location and the movements of the troops. With the 
aid of this information and the various ministerial correspondence, the State has been formed, a 
copy of which is attached. The ambassador must continue this work and look upon it as one of 
the most important cares entrusted to him. He will especially charge his first secretary. M. 
Bignon will inform him of his methods and means. The ambassador will give an even greater 
development. The necessary funds will be made available. It must have a dozen Polish agents at 
the various points of the frontiers, on the roads, in the neighboring countries of the Russian 
provinces, and even, if possible, in the enemy country. Warsaw will be the fixed and central 
point where everything will come to fruition, and a rapid correspondence will be established 
from this point with the office which follows these operations under my direction, at 
headquarters. The inhabitants of the country, put in motion with skill, questioned with 
discernment, must furnish the ambassador with a useful and abundant harvest. 

He will also be in touch with the prefects and sub-prefects of the frontier, with the 
Austrian authorities at Lemberg, with the ambassadors of France at Vienna and at 
Constantinople, with the consuls of the Emperor at Jassy and Bucharest. He will invite them to 
correspond with him and to communicate to him all that may make known the plans and 
movements of the enemy on the various countries where his operations may be extended. 

Baron Bignon will be ordered to remain in Warsaw for as long as the ambassador needs 
to receive from him the local information of which he has perfect knowledge. The ambassador 
will have to choose a Polish interpreter and a Russian interpreter. Mr. Bignon will be able to 
direct him in this choice, which is of great importance. 

The four auditors attached to his embassy (1) are versed in several parts of the 
administration; they will be for the ambassador of the species of bureau chiefs for the various 
services. 

The ambassador, upon his arrival at Warsaw, will inform the Council of Ministers of the 
character with which he is clothed. He will proceed with his installation. He will take office 
immediately, but he will not let anything print until he receives new orders. 





1) MM. Victor de Broglie, Aubernon, Amedee de Brevannes, and Brunet de Panat, auditors of the Council 


of State, had been appointed, by decree of May 28, 1812, embassy auditors attached to the Embassy of Warsaw.““*. 


446 


Page 447 


He will use the first ten days of June to build his house, and he will wait until the 15th to 
receive the authorities, the nobility (1) ...... with the usual ceremonies. 
According to the minute, Archives of Foreign Affairs, 


18735. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Dresden. May 28, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I refer you the Spanish correspondence. 

Write to General Lhuillier to keep an eye on San Sebastian, and always have 3,000 men 
in his hand to direct them to this place, if it needs to be rescued. 

It is necessary to have a lot of people in Bayonne; activate the march of the 3rd and the 
105th and 5th provisional demi-brigade on Bayonne. Hold two brigadier generals there, so that 
General Lhuillier can always have a great deal of strength, to be able to act according to the 
circumstances. Reunite a thousand cavalry men, drawn from the depots of the Spanish army, and 
direct them, trained in marching regiments, on Rayonne. Take in the deposits of the South what 
to train and harness a battery of six pieces of cannon. 

Prescribe to General Lhuillier to keep his troops in the Bastan Valley, at Bayonne, at 
Saint-Jean de Luz, and at Irun, by feeding them well, shackling them, training them, and exerting 
them. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18736. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 28, 1812. 


Cousin, let the artillery general whom I have just given to the Minister of War, be ordered 
to bring to the number of twenty artillery companies destined to serve on the rear of the Grand 
Army. Thirteen exist at Magdeburg, in the places of the Oder, at Danzig, at Spandau, at Pillau, at 
Marienburg, at Erfurt; seven companies are therefore to be sent, which will be destined, namely: 
one new for Spandau, one new for Pillau, to be placed at the point of the Nehrung to beat the 
pass on the side of Danzig, 





1) Here an illegible word.*”” 


447 


Page 448 


one for Thorn, and finally four to follow the army and occupy the works that will be made up to 
the Pregel, where the army will be, 

I ordered the Minister of War to recruit the artillery companies employed in the army, 
120 men on foot, and 100 men on horseback companies. Recommend to the general of artillery 
not to leave any company of the 9th artillery regiment alone, that which is in Spandau can 
remain, because it will be joined there line another French company. The one at Marienburg can 
remain there because of the small importance of this place. If it acquires importance, the 
company of the 9th would be sent to Danzig, and it would be replaced at Marienburg by a 
company to be fired from Danzig. , 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18737, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN, 
Dresden, May 28, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the intendant general that the entire reserve of the hospitals, without 
distracting anything, should be directed to Danzig. This is where all means in hospitals and 
clothing must be brought together. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18738, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN, 
Dresden, May 28, 1812. 


My cousin, my intention is that the 7th Division be organized in the following manner, 
namely: 4 battalions of the 5th Polish regiment, 4 battalions of the 10th, 4 battalions of the 11th, 
2 battalions of Saxons and 2 Bavarian battalions; total, 16 battalions forming three brigades, 

The three Westphalian battalions, the two battalions of Wurtemberg, will be garrisoned at 
Danzig, Nehrung Point, Marienburg, and Pillan. Accordingly, the Prince of Eckmiihl will order 
the 2nd Saxon Battalion of Rechten to join the Ist Battalion, and the 1st Wiirttemberg Battalion 
to replace him at Danzig. He will place a Westphalian battalion at Pillau at the point of Nehrung, 
one at Konigsberg and the third at Marienburg, 

NAPOLEON, 


From the original. Deposit of the war.*** 


448 


Page 449 


18739. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden, May 28, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Prince Eckmiihl that, as I am coming, he must do nothing for Pillau; that 
to send a small number of men, it seems to want to seize the place; that he misunderstood my 
order, that he should occupy Pillau only when the Prussian corps is no longer there, that then all 
the orders for it would be given; instead he has made a useless racket, which has humiliated the 
Prussians and has had a bad effect. Repeat that, since I am in the army, he is not doing anything 
about it. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18740. - NOTE TO THE PRINCE MAJOR GENEHAL, IN DRESDEN. 
Dresden. May 28, 1812. 


The Major General will write to the commander of the artillery that I ordered the siege 
crew to descend on their boats to Elbing, to follow the movement of the army over the Frische 
Haff; but this crew must leave Elbing only when they receive a special order. 

There must also be, brought to Elbing and embarked, an attraction of ropes, anchors and 
all that is necessary to build a bridge with boats of the country. 

We will ship all these materials if it is not possible to hitch them. There must be, on board 
the Frische - Haff, two deck crews on stilts; it is necessary that before 6 they are in Elbing on 
boats ready to sail. 

20,000 quintals of flour, 2,000 quintals of rice and 500,000 rations of biscuit must be 
ready to be sailed from Elbing by the 6th at the latest. Finally the engineer's siege crew must also 
be ready to leave with the artillery crew. 

Write to the General Rapp that it is necessary that he ensures that all the following orders 
are punctually executed. 

Artillery. - The artillery must have put in operation two crews of deck with boats and a 
drawn crew, which must be returned to Elbing in the first days of June; ropes, anchors; 
horseshoes for a deck crew to be made with boats from the country, which must be harnessed, if 
possible, and, if it is not possible, it must be embarked at Elbing on Frische Haff.*”” 


449 


Page 450 


Engineers. - The engineer must have enough to build two bridges on stilts, with bells and 
all that is necessary; it must be embedded. 

Subsistence. - 20,000 quintals of flour, 500,000 rations of biscuit, 2,000 quintals of rice, 
must be embarked at Elbing. This will form the first convoy. This first convoy must be ready 
from Elbing in the early days of June. Rear Admiral Baste will be in charge of organizing and 
escorting him. 

Second convoy - Danzig siege crew, engineer siege crew. This siege crew must be, at the 
latest on 6 June, embarked on the Frische-Haff in Elbing and ready to leave. 

Finally 20,000 quintals of flour, 2,000 quintals of rice and 500,000 rations of biscuit. 

The second convoy will also be under the command of General Baste and will leave only 
on an express order; but it is necessary that the first can set sail on the 6th, and the second, at the 
latest, the 8 or 9; and that of Elbing. In this sense the Major General will write to the Prince of 
Eckmiihl, to the Generals of Artillery and Engineering, to the Intendant General, to General 
Rapp, and to Rear Admiral Baste, who is to organize barges to escort these convoys. 

The major general will inform the general of the artillery that it would be necessary to 
add to these convoys a certain amount of infantry cartridges and cannon fire, especially 12 and 
howitzer, since it is probable that these pieces will be used in the first moment for the passage of 
the rivers. But it is necessary that he report to me on this, that I approve the artillery movements 
on Konigsberg. It would be natural to prefer Pillau, since it is a stronghold. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18741. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, May 31, 1812. 


Cousin, I send you a letter from the Intendant General, which I do not understand. I 
suppose he did not mean that the divisional ambulances would be disembarked: it would be so 
crazy that I can not believe he gave such an order. The four ambulance caissons required by 
division can not be loaded; but the rest, like heaps of linen, piles of mattresses, effects of military 
crews, which I was told in Paris to occupy” 


Page 451 


150 caissons, must be embarked on the Vistula and sent to Danzig to leave the caissons available 
for the transport of bread. Do not waste a moment to rectify these orders, and warn the marshals; 
for it would be a great misfortune if the ambulances had been disorganized. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18742. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, May 31, 1812. 


Cousin, I see with surprise that General Delaborde, instead of leaving on the 24th, left 
only on the 28th. Mandez him to burn Stolpe's stay and direct the march of his infantry so as to 
arrive on the 8th. June in Dirschau; to burn also Konitz's stay for his cavalry, and to make it 
march so as to arrive on the 7th or, at the latest, on the 8th at Dirschau, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18743.-TO THE COUNT COLLIN DE SUSSY, 
MINISTER OF MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE, PARIS. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Count de Sussy, the taxation of wheat by the prefect of Caen at 33 francs per hectolitre is 
very extraordinary. I do not understand how this prefect disregarded the principle. I expected you 
to tell me a word about the motives that decided it. approve that you have given him the 100 
francs from the sale of the flours; but I think that the best operation that the municipality of Caen 
should do would be to bring wheat from the department of Roer. Give permission, making sure 
that wheat comes from the Roer. By employing 100,000 ecus for this object, it is the best way to 
loan 100,000 ecus to the inhabitants of Caen. If you want to use Vanlerberghe for this operation, 
I do not object to it. 

According to the minute. Archives of the Empire.**! 





451 


Page 452 


18744. - TO THE GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT DE CESSAC, 
MINISTER DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE WAR, IN PARIS. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Count of Cessac, the Vistula regiments left 724 men in the Sedan depot, who were 
waiting to leave only their coats. However, these men do not leave. It is unfortunate to be obliged 
to leave in France, where they are useless, men who would be so useful here; put them in a 
position to leave without delay. The regiments of the Vistula which are at Posen do not yet have 
their shakos, which they were to receive upon their departure at Paris. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18745. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Belluno to see M. de Hardenberg, and ask that orders be 
given to Holberg so that the French officers may be treated well, that they may see everything 
and go everywhere; so that in case of an event they serve under the command of the Kolberg 
commander as Prussian officers, and for the commander of Kolberg to have mobile columns on 
the coast, on the right and on the left, and to behave well in case of attack of the enemy. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18746. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Cousin, order Major-General Partouneaux to leave with the 29th and 10th light infantry 
regiments forming four battalions, with the three battalions of the 126th and a brigadier general, 
on June 3rd, from Berlin, to go to Stettin with all due diligence. Order the artillery of this 
division, which arrives on the 3rd at Magdeburg, to leave the 4th for Stettin. The 2nd Brigade, 
composed of the 44th and the Provisional Regiment, will remain in Berlin until the 9th. On June 
10th this 2nd Brigade will leave for Stettin. The 125th will head straight to the 32nd division on 
Stettin. So the whole*” 





452 


Page 453 


Partouneaux division will be united in this last place. The regiment formed of two battalions of 
Walcheren and Belle-Ile, which arrives on June 9th in Berlin, will replace the 2nd brigade. The 
Ath battalion of Walcheren and the 4th of Belle-Ile, belonging to the 4th reserve division, will 
remain in Berlin until further notice. The 6th battalion of the 19th line, which belongs to the Ist 
reserve division, will garrison Spandau. Thus, by this means, the Ist brigade, with the artillery 
division Partouneaux, will be available in Stettin from 8 or 9 June; the 2nd Brigade will be 
surrendered and available at Stettin on the 15th; so that the 15th division, with its artillery, will 
be able to leave Stettin to go wherever it is necessary. 

Order the five battalions of the Berg Brigade to leave without delay to go to Danzig with 
his fourteen pieces of artillery and the cavalry regiment. It is necessary to accelerate this 
movement, so that the Ist battalion arrives towards the 10th, and the others, as well as the 
artillery and the cavalry, from the 10th to the 15th. The Baden brigade will make the same 
movement in the following way: the Ist regiment of the line will set out on the 4th of Stettin to 
go to Danzig in all speed; the battalion of the 3rd regiment, which is at Kiistrin, will leave for 
Danzig on the 3d; the Ist battalion of the 1st light infantry, which is at Stettin, will leave as soon 
as a battalion of the Partouneaux division has arrived, that is to say, at the latest on the 7th; so 
that the eight pieces of artillery and the brigade of Baden, with five battalions, will also meet 
from the 10th to the 15th at Danzig. General Daendels will follow the movement of this second 
brigade. The Guards Infantry Regiment of the Grand Duke of Hesse has already been ordered to 
proceed to headquarters. The battalion of light infantry of Hesse-Darmstadt, which is at Stettin 
with its artillery pieces, will be garrisoned in Swedish Pomerania, as soon as a battalion of the 
Partouneaux division has arrived at Stettin. Regiment No. 4 of the Princely Division had to leave 
Hamburg on May 27 for Swedish Pomerania. Finally, you will order the Westphalian regiment at 
Magdeburg to leave, not for Glogau, as my last order is, but for Swedish Pomerania, as soon as a 
demi-brigade of the Lagrange division, which had to leave for the Ist. June of Cologne, will have 
arrived in Magdeburg. The garrison of Swedish Pomerania will therefore consist of the 
Confederate Regiment No. 4, with two battalions, the Light Infantry Battalion of Hesse- 
Darmstadt, and the Westphalian Regiment at Magdeburg; total, 6 Hesse-Darmstadt battalions 
and 6 pieces of cannon; which, supported by the Partouneaux division, which will be at Stettin, 
and the Heudelet division,*™* 





453 


Page 454 


occupying Mecklenburg and the 32nd Military Division will provide sufficient strength for the 
defense of the coast. 

You will order General Lagrange to place his four demi-brigades thus: the more remote, 
the one which still has detachments to receive from France, he will leave it at Magdeburg to form 
the garrison of this place; the other demi-brigades will march to Berlin, where they will be 
quartered, in order to be able to train them more quickly and to maintain a more severe discipline 
there. As soon as two demi-brigades of this division have arrived in Berlin, the battalions of 
Walcheren and Belle-Ile and what could be there belonging to the 4th division of the reserve will 
be directed on Stettin to form the garrison of Stettin. The entire division Durulle, which is the 
fourth, will be formed in Stettin, which will then make available the division Partouneaux. The 
3rd division of the reserve, composed of the 10, 11th, 12th and 13th provisional demi-brigades, 
which go from France, will meet in Berlin; which will make available the whole Lagrange 
division, which will then go on Stettin, Danzig or Thorn, according to the circumstances. 

Thus the Daendels division must as soon as possible march on Danzig, namely: the 
brigade of Berg, cavalry, infantry, artillery, infantry and artillery of Baden and the cavalry of 
Hesse-Darmstadt, which will make 10 battalions, 2 cavalry regiments and 22 pieces of cannon; 
the two battalions of Berg which are in roll will join Danzig, as well as the two squadrons of the 
same grand-duchy, which will then bring that division to twelve battalions. The Partouneaux 
division will first be under observation at Stettin, ready to support Swedish Pomerania, to go to 
Hamburg, to the mouths of the Oder and wherever it is needed; and towards the end of June, 
when she receives the order, she will go to Danzig. The Polish division of General Girard will be 
the 3rd division of the 9th corps under the orders of the Duke de Bellune. He will meet in Berlin. 
I will give the order for his movement as soon as I know his progress. It is likely that in the 
course of June it will have exceeded the Oder. At the end of June, the 9th Corps, composed of 
three infantry divisions, a cavalry brigade and fifty-six pieces of cannon, will be on the Vistula, 
forming a reserve for the entire army, which will then be 60 leagues ahead. The Ist division of 
the reserve (the Lagrange division) will also run on the Vistula River. This Ist division will have 
to be dissolved, since it consists only of 5th and 6th battalions; but, while waiting for him to 
rejoin the army, he may be under the command of the Duke de Bellune, which will bring this 
corps to fifty-six." 


454 


Page 455 


battalions. On the left of the Oder only three divisions of the reserve will remain behind: the 2nd 
division, with five demi-brigades, garrisoned in the 32nd division and Mecklenburg, the 3rd, 
holding garrison in Berlin, and the 4th, holding garrison at Stettin. These three divisions will 
form forty-six battalions, ready to go to Hamburg, to Swedish Pomerania, and to whatever point 
is attacked. They will also provide a necessary garrison supplement to Stettin. Pomerania will 
have its own garrison, as stated above. Berlin and Spandau will also have their own garrison. 
Kiistrin will also have his garrison. It will be necessary to appoint a marshal in Berlin to 
command this reserve. I choose the Marshal Duke of Castiglione. Write to the Minister of War to 
find out if this marshal is in a state. 

The Ist division of the reserve, as I said, does not need artillery, since it is composed of 
half-brigades. 

The 2nd must have twelve pieces of cannon, as I gave the order to the Minister of War. 
The 3rd and 4th must also have two batteries. Write to the Minister of War to have them in the 
course of July. As for the cavalry of the reserve, it will consist of eight squadrons of dragoons, 
who must be part of the Grand Army. 

It is necessary that the Duke de Bellune be familiar with the corps composing the four 
divisions of the reserve. I guess you have these details. If you did not have them, you could have 
them taken at my desk. You will order that the regiment of cavalry of Baden be attached until 
further notice to the Partouneaux division, since it is not proper to clear the rear of all cavalry. 
Recommend the Duke de Bellune to organize the Partouneaux and Daendels divisions. Although 
the latter went to Danzig without delay, he was still part of his army corps. 

Thus, in the course of July, there will be in the course of July, on the rear, the 9th corps 
and the Ist reserve division, forming fifty-six battalions, or more than 40,000 infantrymen, fifty 
to fifty-six pieces of cannon, and 1,500 cavalry men. 

General Partouneaux must have two brigadier generals. 

There will be behind, in the second line, the 2nd division of the reserve in the 32nd 
division, with 20 battalions, the 3rd division in Berlin, 12 battalions; the 4th division at Stettin, 
12 battalions; total, 41, battalions; plus eight squadrons of dragons forming 1,500 men, and 
thirty-six pieces of artillery; regardless of the 2 battalions”? 


455 


Page 456 


garrison of the 32nd Division, the 6th of the garrison of Swedish Pomerania, the Kiistrin 
Battalion, the 3 of Berlin and the 2 of Glogau; total, 14 garrison battalions. 

The three divisions of the reserve will always be able to move about, to carry wherever it 
is necessary, and form with the reserve of Erfurt a corps of 30 to 40,000 men sufficient to 
guarantee of all descent Pomerania, Mecklenburg, clear Kolberg, or help the 32nd Division; all 
the more so in the event of unforeseen events, 2,000 men from Saxony and some help from 
Prussia and Westphalia could be drawn. 

In communicating these measures to the Duke of Bellune and giving him these orders, 
you will let him know that the important thing is that I have, before the 15th of June, the whole 
Daendels division at Danzig, in order to put this coast to the shelter from a descent and not to be 
obliged for it to strip my army. 

Send an officer to the Duke of Bellune, to report to me the account of the execution of 
my orders and the details of the movement of all the troops. He will also report the exact 
situation of the troops, because my intention is to supplement them by directing marching 
battalions on these corps. 

Make known all these provisions to the Minister of War, so that he feels the importance 
of directing the sooner the 10th, 11th and 12th demi-brigades on Berlin. This 3rd division of the 
reserve will be entrusted to General Seras. You will introduce me to replace him in Glogau's 
command. In making known to me the execution of my orders, submit me a table which 
indicates the day when each of these bodies will arrive. My intention being to form a corps of the 
2nd, 3rd, and 4th divisions of the reserve, it is necessary to attach a superior officer of artillery, 
and that this corps be able in the course of July. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18747. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Bellune to give all the necessary orders for Spandau to be 
put in a position to support a siege, if necessary, passed on the 15th of June. There must be a 
commanding general, an artillery officer, an engineer officer, ae 





456 


Page 457 


an artillery storekeeper, an engineer storekeeper and a food storekeeper attached to the place. I 
ordered that there were two companies of artillery, of at least 140 men each, for the service of 
this place. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18748. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY; A POSEN. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Duke of Elchingen to summon light cavalry from his army corps by 
the light cavalry of Wurtemberg, in order to increase his cavalry, and let this troop marching 
together take on a better spirit than if it marched alone with his infantry. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18749. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Cousin, order that on the 4th of June, one of the 3rd battalions of the Vistula regiments, 
completed to 840 men, well dressed, well armed and in good condition, be sent to Thorn, where 
he will be garrisoned. Order that from the 4th to the 12th a second battalion also leave for Thorn. 
Finally give the order that a third battalion, also completed with 840 men, leave before the 15th. 
These battalions will be under the orders of a major or colonel taken from those who are 
following; he will be appointed by General Claparéde. These battalions will remain in Thorn 
until further notice and until they are sufficiently educated and able to be placed in line. I do not 
speak of the companies of voltigeurs nor those of grenadiers; these battalions, destined to be 
poured into others, must not have any; They do, in the meantime, useful to Thorn. I suppose that 
you will review it before their departure, and that you will have made sure that they are in good 
condition and lack nothing. Also instruct the Posen depot to provide the Vistula soldiers with a 
pair of shoes so that they have a one bag and line to the feet. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war’! 


457 


Page 458 


18750. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN POSEN. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Cousin, order the artillery general to send 25,000 guns and 2 million cartridges to Danzig, 
and have them transported to the citadel of Pillau; to carry the deposit of cartridges of Thorn to 4 
millions by pouring the 2 millions which are embarked with the crew of siege of Magdeburg. 
Thorn's depot will consist of 4 million French cartridges and 1,500,000 Polish cartridges. Order 
that 1,200,000 Polish cartridges leave Thorn for Modlin immediately; that 500,000 French 
cartridges also leave Thorn for Modlin, which will bring Modlin's depot to more than 2 million 
Polish and French cartridges. Order that 300,000 French cartridges of Thorn be sent to 
Marienwerder to be at the disposal of the Duke of Reggio, that 300,000 be sent to Marienburg 
and 300,000 to Plock at the disposal of the viceroy. The deposit of 4 million French cartridges 
will therefore be reduced to 2,600,000 (including what must happen from Kiistrin), and that of 
Polish cartridges to 300,000. There will still be 2,900,000 cartridges in Thorn. 

Order the artillery general to guard the deck crew near Marienburg, on the island of 
Nogat, and to announce the day he arrived there for me to give further orders. He must make the 
noise to Danzig that this crew goes to Warsaw. Order that the siege crew of Danzig, if not yet at 
Elbing, stop opposite Marienburg. Order that the siege crew of Magdeburg proceed to Thorn, 
where it will remain until further notice. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18751. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE BIG ARMY, PLOCK. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


My son, I have been here since yesterday. I will be in Thorn tomorrow, where I will stay 
the day after tomorrow. 

Make a bargain to transport, at a rate of 1,000 quintals a day, 10,000 quintals on 
Willenberg. This market will be?’ 


458 


Page 459 


best price possible by your authorizing officer with the locals. To that end, I will make funds 
available to you. You will have it executed under the approval of the intendant. It can be 
continued for another 10 thousand quintals if the intendant approves it. 

I just needed 2,000 horses in Marienburg. You are included for 120 horses for your 
Italian crews; however, as it would divert the men on foot whom you would send to look for 
these horses, if you can buy horses on Plock's side, I will authorize you and grant you funds. The 
artillery of your army corps needing 500 horses, I ordered that 1,000 were supplied to Glogau, 
both for your French artillery and for your Italian artillery. It is necessary that you send men on 
foot to look for them. I ordered that your battalion of oxen receive, by passing at Glogau, oxen in 
good condition, replacing the bad ones. If, at the arrival of these battalions at Plock, there were 
still oxen which were in bad condition, they could be chosen from Modlin or bought from the 
country to replace the bad ones. These 300 wagons, which will bring you 3,000 quintals, will be 
of great use to you. 

Send one of your intelligent engineers to recognize the country from Johannisburg to 
Hastenburg, Angerburg and Goldap. It will follow the banks of the Goldap and advance through 
Augustowo to the border near Grodno. Have a staff officer at the village closest to Grodno, to 
inform you of all the movements and information that will come to his knowledge. In general, 
have a trusted man acquainted with all the countries situated between the Narew and the Niemen, 
from the point which is opposite Grodno to Tykocin, Willenberg, Angerburg, Augustowo, & c., 
so that you know all these localities, where it is possible that you have to maneuver. You will 
send me a copy of all the acknowledgments and information you receive. 

I guess you can not be embarrassed for wheat. If, however, you feel any embarrassment, 
there are department stores at Plock, Wyszogrod, and Woclawek; have them there, grind and 
have a large quantity transported on Willenberg and Soldau. In the season, horses must not 
starve; the grass must be good to eat. 

I need a report from you to let me know how many pontoons you have for river crossings, 
and how many cannons you shoot at each piece. It seems to me that*”? 


459 


Page 460 


you have left a lot of caissons in Glogau that will soon reach you. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18752. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th COPS OF THE BIG ARMY, PLOCK. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


My Son, I receive your letter of May 31st, from your aide-de-camp who has passed 
through Thorn. Since there is no Thorn at Plock but seven hours, come and see me at Thorn on 
the 3rd or 4th. 

There is no problem in leaving a hospital of 300 patients at Plock; they will join after 
Thorn. I wrote to you in great detail today to allow you to tap into the shops in Wloclawek, grind 
flour and direct it to Willenberg. 

I ordered a horse-lift at Glogau: it will be necessary for the Italian carters you have with 
you to return to Glogau. 

At Glogau I had some oxen sent to the Italian crew battalion, which is going well; you are 
wrong to despair of it; I hope it will be before the 10th at Plock. If General Guyon passes 4 or 5, 
he can easily join you, and the marching battalions be dissolved. If the cadres belong to the five 
battalions, it will be appropriate to send them back. I authorized you to enter into markets to 
bring flour to Willenberg; when you send twenty thousand quintals, it would not be too much. I 
suppose you will not eat your oxen and keep them until you are moving. 

Make me pass the recognitions of the countries you have visited. 

The staff here has no trace of the movement of the 2nd battalion of the Mediterranean. 
Send me the itinerary of this battalion, which, being composed of refractory conscripts, does not 
belong to any army corps. As for the Ist Battalion, if it left on May 19th, it will arrive at Glogau 
around June 15th. I order him to keep a garrison at Glogau; the men will be very tired, I wish that 
they rest entirely there; shouted I will be able to remove the two battalions that are cut. 

Make convoys talk every day about Plock and Wloclawek to maintain your handling. I 
suppose that“ 


460 


Page 461 


you have cartridges, and you will not wait at the last moment to empty the caissons of cartridges 
into the caissons, and after return the caissons when the corps goes forward, which would be too 
long. I ordered that 300,000 rounds should be sent to Plock at your disposal; take them to Soldau, 
if your soldiers do not need them to stuff their bags. 

I ordered the formation of six cart companies in the country, of 100 carts each company, 
at Plock, Bromberg, Thorn, etc .; these 600 carts will be at your disposal and for the service of 
your corps. As I presume that your authorizing officer will receive this decision from the 
Intendant General, arrange for the organization of the 100 cars to be trained at Plock. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18753.- TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE BIG ARMY, PLOCK. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812, 


My son, I have named General Dessolle for your chief of staff. Brigadier General 
Plauzonne could be the Chief of Staff of the Duke of Abrantes. You will keep General 
Charpentier a few days, until you are certain of being satisfied with General Dessolle, then I will 
place General Charpentier in a government. 

As long as you have only the 4th corps and the Bavarians, you can always keep the 
command of the 4th corps at once; but, as it may happen that you sometimes have three corps 
d'armee under your command, it would be proper for the duke d'Abrantes to have a separate 
staff, but that does not bother you to give your orders immediately to the 4th corps, while you are 
there and you have only two army corps. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18754. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE BIG ARMY, PLOCK. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


My son, there are 22,000 quintals of wheat in Plock, in stores that I had sequestered. 
Finish all the formalities, and get hold of it. Convert this wheat into flour and pass markets**! 


461 


Page 462 


to have it transported to Willenberg. I sequestered a large quantity of wheat at Wloclawek; I 
ordered that 25,000 quintals would be drawn to be transported on Modlin; let me know if they 
are gone. 17,000 quintals must be made available to you; take them without delay, and send 
them to Willenberg, and arrange for the carriage to be at the rate of 1,000 quintals a day. To 
avoid overcrowding Willenberg, you can place some in rear positions, such as Soldau, etc. 

I ordered that 300,000 cartridges of Thorn be sent to Plock, they will be at your disposal 
and will complete your supply. I took steps to have the 100 caissons that you left at Glogau 
hitched in the first half of June. I suppose you left there carters, at least Italians; but, in the 
meantime, I give orders to keep at your disposal 10,000 knocks at Thorn and 10,000 at Modlin, 
which will make half a supply for your corps. Your artillery general can hold them back, and 
move him forward when he needs them. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18755. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE Sth, 7th AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN WARSAW. 
Posen, June Ist, 1812. 


Brother, I have been in Posen since yesterday. You have received a letter from me 
containing general instructions, which must have been preceded by orders of the General Staff to 
be executed from the Ist to the 7th of June. 

The authorizing officer of the right will have informed you of the measures which I have 
prescribed to the intendant general for the supply of Pultusk, Modlin, and Warsaw. It is 
necessary that there be 10,000 quintals of flour at Pultusk and 25,000 at Modlin for the supply of 
the army which will follow the course of the Narew; it must have been in addition to 25,000 
quintals in Warsaw. I have these supplies pulled from the different shops along the Vistula River 
from Plock. The Authorizing Officer will also have made known to you my agenda for the 16th 
Battalion Crew and the measures taken to have 600 wagons in the country following your corps. 
Press the execution of these measurements. We are in a season*™ 


462 


Page 463 


where horses can not perish from hunger; the grass must already be good to eat. 

I am probably leaving this night for Thorn, where I will be tomorrow, and after, and hear 
from you. 

I want you to recognize the Omulew, Pultusk, Ostrolenka, Nowogrod, Lomza; but if you 
go so far, you have to go incognito. 

Hold an officer at Tykocin and one at Terespol vis-a-vis Brzesc to report to you on what 
is happening in Bialystok and on the Russian border. Get the line from Johannisburg to 
Nowogrod. Accredit by all means the noise of your march on Lublin. Accredit also the sound of 
my prompt arrival in Warsaw. Let General Reynier make the rumor that he saw the bridge of 
Pulawi pass to Zamosc, inform the commander of Zamosc, that arrangements be made to receive 
this body. You will order the officer you will observe at Tykocin to send reports on Osterode and 
Thorn, and by courier, whenever it matters. The department whose county seat is in Siedlce must 
provide you with resources. It is important that you have your twenty days of food independently 
from the shops of Pultusk, Ostrolenka and Modlin. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. St. Stephen, Prince Jerome. 


18756. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 3, 1812. 


Cousin, write to General Eble, director of the ports of the army, that the Prussians have at 
Tapiau a bridge of boats in the best condition, which they have withdrawn; it was the same they 
had at Tilsit; that they have at Koenigsberg a hundred pontoons suitable for laying a bridge 800 
feet long. Let him recognize these objects and the pontoon companies that the Prussian army 
could have in order to be able to use each other's opportunities. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18757. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 3, 1812. 


Cousin, let the Duke of Elchingen know that after i a 


463 


Page 464 


the Guard will occupy as far as Strassburg, that it is necessary, therefore, that his corps should be 
placed from Strassburg to Osterode. Recommend to him also to form a depot of the sick and 
weary men, and to leave him to Thorn, especially the Wurtembergers, and also to form a depot 
of broken horses and to direct them on Thorn, either of his three brigades of cavalry, or of the 
2nd body. Let him name a captain to order this small deposit. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18758. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Thorn. June 4, 1812. 


One can not be more dissatisfied than I am about the two sapper companies that were on 
the island of Elba. They are naked. How could the authorizing officer let them go in this state? 
You will see that by an order of the day I have ordered an inquiry on this subject. 

I am extremely unhappy that the Authorizing Officer Jacqueminot left the army when he 
began to know the service and without waiting for the arrival of the person who was to replace 
him. If I had not remembered the services of his father, senator, I would have loved him at the 
command of the army and dishonored him. We are asking to come to the army and not to fight. 
Give him the order that in a month he has joined, and make the senator understand the danger his 
son has run and the bad prejudice that it leaves in my mind. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18759. - NOTE TO THE PRINCE MAJOR GENERAL AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 4th, 1812. 


There will be in Thorn hospitals for 1,200 patients, namely: the town hall for 600; three 
of the existing hospitals, 300; and convents for 300. The Intendant General will be given these 
establishments during the day. The feverish hospital will be immediately suppressed, which is 
very bad, and, as there are only 300 men, they will be placed without delay in a part of the town 
hall. The other part of this house may be evacuated only in eight or ten days. The municipality 
will move elsewhere. A hospital in Wloclawek will be established in a convent and a house that 
has already been*™ 


464 


Page 465 


assigned to this purpose. This hospital will be assigned to the 4th Corps and the Bavarians. The 
5th, 7th, and 8th corps will send their patients to Warsaw hospitals; 3rd Corps and Guard at 
Thorn; the 2nd, at Marienburg; the Ist, in Elbing. 

It was ordered to establish a hospital in Danzig in Oliva Abbey. This establishment is 
very important, because the air of Oliva is very healthy, an advantage which does not exist at 
Danzig. 

It will be convenient to establish a hospital at Osterode, one at Konigsberg, one at 
Wehlau, one at Soldau, and one at Willenberg for the 4th Corps and the Bavarians; one to 
Pultusk for the 5th Corps. The Thorn Hospital will be maintained by army funds. 

The Major-General will give all the necessary orders to the Intendant General, the 
Commanding Officer, and the Commander of the Engineers, so that Thorn's hospitals may be 
established without delay. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18760. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 4th, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Prince Eckmiihl that when you ordered him to buy twenty days of food, 
you heard that it would be done regularly and without fodder; that terror and desolation are in 
Poland the conduct of the Wurtembergers; that he is obliged to put an end to this way of doing 
things; let him make His Majesty's dissatisfaction with the Wiirttembergois known, and take the 
most prompt measures to ensure that the country is not devastated, otherwise we will find 
ourselves in Portugal. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18761. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 4th, 1812. 


My cousin, I beg you to present me in the morning the organization of the service of the 
intendant general, because I do not understand which are the officers he put at the head of the 
various services. It is not enough for the steward to be content; this organization must be 
consistent with the experience of all times. The steward*® 





465 


Page 466 


can not be everywhere, nor know everything; it is necessary, therefore, that the responsibility 
weigh not only on him, but on the organizers, and that I know them. It is proper to present them 
to me, as well as the chiefs of service, the paymaster-general of the army, & c., And that 
henceforth the order be established in such a manner that the headquarters march in order and by 
day, like a regiment . I ordered to punish the payer who did not sleep overnight at headquarters. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18762. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn. June 4, 1812, 


Cousin, there is at Thorn a feverish hospital very unhealthy and very badly established. 
Give orders to the authorizing officer in charge of the hospitals, to the general commanding the 
place, and to the first doctor and surgeon to consult one another to choose another room. It is 
very important to have a good hospital at Thorn, and nothing must be spared for that. As a 
consequence of the unsuitability of the present hospital, write to the viceroy to leave a hospital at 
Plock for the Bavarians and the 4th corps, and to place there the sick who would be in his army 
corps; all the more so that in the event of an event it might be useful for him to be able to direct 
his wounded on Plock, so as not to burden Thorn too much. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18763. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn. June 4, 1812. 


Cousin, you do not get enough news, either commanders or governors. Charge someone 
to follow this correspondence so that, whenever there is a delay in the dispatch of the 
commanders of the place, you can let them know that the negligence has been noticed by you 
and show them your dissatisfaction. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.“ 





Page 467 


18764. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 4th, 1812. 


Cousin, it seems to me that there is anarchy in the place of Thorn. I do not see the 
necessity of keeping as commanders a French general and a Polish general; the Polish general 
seems to me sufficient. It is necessary to give him as deputies the French officers who are 
necessary, so that there is to Thorn only one commander, having the proper means. See to 
organize this staff in the morning. 

I have just written to you to keep at Thorn the Wurtemberger battalion which was to 
leave it today. When the battalion of the 3rd regiment of the Vistula, which I ordered to form at 
Posen, has arrived at Thorn, it will be possible, according to the circumstances, to dispose of the 
Wurtemberger battalion and to have it rejoined. 

Charge an adjutant commander to remain at Thorn for the inspection of the depots, stores 
and cavalry depots which are at Thorn, and to correspond exactly with you on the service of the 
army, but under the military orders of the commandant of the place. As soon as the service of the 
place of Thorn is assured by the Wurtemberger battalion, you will order the depot of the 5th 
Polish regiment to leave Thorn to go on Danzig by the left bank, so that it does not interfere with 
our movements. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18765. - TO MARECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT ELBING. 
Thorn, June 4th, 1812. 


Cousin, I send you my aide-de-camp, General Hogendorp, who is destined to take 
command of Konigsberg, Pillau, and the province of Konigsberg. Assist him as commissioner of 
wars and all that is necessary for him. My intention is that he enter Konigsberg only with your 
Ist division. 

Inform general Grawert that General Kleist left Plock to join him with the Silesian 
Brigade. 

All my Guard meets here. I intend to see her tomorrow, finish some affairs of the 
administration, and go to Marienburg and Danzig. Let me know if the deck crew has arrived in 
Marienburg, and if the 20,000 quintals of rice and flour have arrived at*°” 


467 


Page 468. 


Elbing. Almost all the army will feed on Konigsberg and the Passarge. I therefore think that 
more than 4,000 quintals will be required per day, which will make 40,000 quintals for ten days. 
You told me, I believe, that there were 40,000 quintals at Konigsberg. The 20,000 quintals that 
are shipped will carry this supply. 60,000 quintals. I suppose that Konigsborg, Wehlau, and other 
points of the Passarge must furnish means of milling. My intention is that 20,000 quintals of 
flour will follow the first 20,000. It is not wheat, but flour that can be missed. For masses like 
these, if the precautions are not taken, the mills of any country will not suffice. I suppose that 
Danzig and Elbing are forcibly mowed. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18766. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 5, 1812, 


My Cousin, the headquarters will leave after tomorrow 7, and will arrive on the 10th at 
Osterode. You will order that the small headquarters, which has left this morning 5 and arrives 
there on the 8th, leave on the 9th for Heilsberg, where it will arrive on the 10th. You will order 
that my war service shall rest one day at Osterode and from there continue on Heilsberg. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18767. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn. June 5, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia that the men with malingers who are at the 
convalescent hospitals of Warsaw may remain there, because at the first event these men would 
be in a few hours at Modlin; that the main thing is not to leave Warsaw big stores and to lock 
everything in the place of Modlin. 

Make known to the King of Westphalia that I remove the Westphalians from the 7th 
Division and bring them to Marienburg; that when the Daendels division has arrived at Gdansk, 
my intention is to send him back his brigade. Write the same thing to Prince Eckmiihl,** 





468 


Page 469 


so that the Westphalians know it and are not sorry to be in garrison. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18768. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn, June 5, 1812. 


My Son, you will receive from the Major General orders for your movement on 
Rastenburg. This is only a first movement, because it has to continue on Seyny, my intention 
being to gather there, on the 17th and the 18th, all your army corps, while the Ist, the 2nd, the 
3rd, and the 4th. Guard will be gathered at Wilkowyszki, that the king of Westphalia will be at 
Pultusk with the 5th and 8th corps, the 7th corps on Praga, and the Austrians arrived at Lublin 
already on us. It is easy for you to understand that in this position, if the enemy took the 
offensive to march on Warsaw, if he debouched by Bialystok, you would find himself on his 
right flank, and that, if he debouched by Olitta, you would be on his left flank. If he debouched 
on you, you would rely on the army; hence, the need for your corps to change line of operation. 
He can still keep that of Plock for a long time. But as soon as the enemies begin their movement, 
on the 18th, your line will have to go to Thorn and even to Marienburg. So, assuming the King of 
Westphalia withdraws to Modlin, your line is not compromised and you can maneuver, on the 
contrary, quietly to place yourself on the enemy's line of operation. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18769. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE 5th, 7th AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN WARSAW. 
Thorn. June 5, 1812. 


Brother, I receive your letter from your aide-de-camp. The major-general writes you to 
let you know the plan of operations you have to do. In this business, and in such a great theater, 
one succeeds only on a well-established plan and with very good agreement. It is therefore 
necessary to study your orders well and to do here neither more nor less than what one tells you, 
especially with regard to combined movement.* 





469 


Page 470 


Announce that I am going to see the deposit of Danzig, and that immediately afterwards I 
return to pass the review of the corps of the viceroy, that of the Poles at Pultusk, and at Warsaw 
that of the two other corps. Make Warsaw do anything that can give credence to this news. 
Establish a good police at the borders, and make sure nothing happens in Russia, neither couriers 
nor posts, under any pretext whatsoever. Everything that comes will have to be sent to 
headquarters. Order Prince Poniatowski to correspond with the Viceroy and General Rapp, to let 
them know what is new. 

It is also necessary that your three corps correspond with the major general. It is the 
major general who must correspond only with you; but the commanders of these corps must send 
exactly the details of their position to the major general. 

It seems that there is enough wheat in Modlin; what is missing is flour. Pultusk, 
Ostrolenka and Warsaw must have enough means of food. I gave all the necessary orders for it. 
Let me know how far, in the months of June and July, the Narew is navigable. Is it carrying boat 
right now to Nowogrod and Lomza? 

I believe I have made known to you what you have best to do naked beginning of the 
campaign: first, make believe that you will enter Volyn and keep the enemy as much as possible 
on the party, while, overflowing on his extreme right, I will have won twelve or fifteen steps in 
the direction of Petersburg, I will be on his right wing, I will pass the Niemen and remove Villa, 
which is the first object of the campaign. 

The movement of the Prince of Schwarzenberg on Lublin will not fully demonquer this 
design, since the enemy will be able to go black, which, assembled at Zamosc, we will leave 
from there to enter Volhynia. 

When this operation is unmasked, the enemy will take one of two parties: either he will 
rally in the interior of his states to find himself in force to fight, or he will take the offensive 
himself. Thus, while the extremity of the right is overflowing, it could march on Warsaw, either 
by opening on Ostrolenka and Pultusk, either by opening on Nur and Sierock, or by coming 
straight into Praga. All the depots of my army must be assembled in Modlin, but slowly and 
without precipitation. Your body is destined to defend Warsaw; and for this purpose, the 5th 
corps at Ostrolenka, the 7th corps at Sierock and Praga, your neighborhood*”° 


470 


Page 471 


General to Pultusk, this is the position you will receive order to take towards the 10th. The 7th 
corps, returning from Lublin, will put your whole corps in your hand; and then, if the enemy 
attacks by Ostrolenka or between Bug and Narew, the Viceroy's corps is on its right flank; if he 
attacks by Brzcsc and Zamosc, or if he comes straight to Praga with considerable forces, the 8th 
corps first, then the 7th, and after the 7th the Austrians, guard Praga and Warsaw. Modlin and 
Sierock will be covered with the 5th and 8th corps, and later with the 5th, 7th and 8th corps. 
While the enemy is on the ramparts of Pruga and on the banks of the Vistula, merely supporting 
Modlin, Sierock, and Pultusk, you will find yourself in the army, and by my movement to the 
right all his army would be overflowed and thrown into the Vistula. 

It is not out of place that the National Sardinian of Warsaw should be organized, at least 
several battalions; they can only be useful to the service. 

Besides, I will always find myself in a position to be able to give you greater 
explanations and to add developments to that general instruction. 

If the enemy took the offensive abruptly and General Reynier had some difficulty in 
returning to Warsaw, which is hardly probable, you would support him by the 4th corps of 
cavalry and the 8th corps. But, in general, you must calculate as probable that all your army 
corps will end up wearing Pultusk on Ostrolcnka, Nur, Bialystok or Grodno. It is necessary that 
the bridgehead of Pultusk be completed and well armed, as well as the works of Sierock. Or 
make sure that there is a bridgehead on the left bank at Sierock, it is necessary to put it in order. 

I will keep the right bank; but it is possible that I abandon the whole left bank, although I 
will leave it only to superior forces, and not to a division of. 12 to 13,000 men, not to some 
Cossack regiments. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. Prince Jerome. 


18770. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE 5th, 7th AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN WARSAW. 
Thorn. June 5, 1812. 


Brother, I'm leaving for Danzig tonight. My headquarters is heading to Osterode, where I 
will probably be on the Oth”! 





471 


Page 472 


frequently with the viceroy, so that the news can be passed from right to left. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to the copy comm. by S. A. J. Prince Jerome. 


18771. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT ELBING. 
Thorn, June 5th, 1812. 


Cousin, I receive your letters of June 4th. My intention was indeed to occupy Pillau only 
when your corps was in Konigsberg. All that has been done to make me think that I attach great 
importance to Pillau is contrary to my intentions. The artillery general ordered the deck crew to 
meet at Marienburg; the island of Nogat has appeared a more advantageous position. Since then, 
this deck crew, who is under the command of General Eble, has been ordered to go by the 
shortest way to Heilsberg, he must leave tomorrow. The Danube battalion and the crew of sailors 
leave Danzig to join him. Engineering Park also left to join him, from Thorn on the 3rd; which 
will bring together, under the command of General Eble, an important material which will 
include all that is necessary. Being informed that the siege crew did not have enough water to 
come from Danzig to Elbing, I ordered him to come to Dirschau and from there to Marienburg, 
he is there more secure. This siege crew must not arrive at Konigsberg before receiving new 
orders. I was glad to know where he is, out of all danger; my intention is that he leave it only 
when I have unmasked my movement. 

I think the guns for the Baden troops are on the way; their government sends them 
French-style rifles. The battalion you left at Dirschau can go to Danzig to garrison there, or to 
garrison Marienburg. 

I delayed my departure to see the Guard, put the affairs of the administration in order, 
give the last orders, and set everything in motion. I intend to leave this night and go through the 
left bank. I will be in Marienburg tomorrow, where I intend to see you. You have to get moving 
on the 7th; you will receive orders from the Major General to occupy the banks of the Pregel. 
Your corps will have to march in columns to occupy the points of Insterburg and Wehlau, at the 
same time as Konigsberg. The 20,000 quintals of flour that I have shipped must not be 
unloaded*”” 





472 


Page 473 


to Konigsberg, but to turn on the Pregel, when my troops have arrived there, and be disembarked 
at Insterburg, where I intend to establish a large center of provisions and handling. The boats will 
return to Konigsberg for food. 

I sent General Hogendorp to command Konigsberg. Appoint a very reliable officer to 
command Pillau under his orders. The pass being only 400 toises, there is nothing to fear, and 
the entry of enemy buildings is impossible. 

Bring me to Marienburg the state of all the flours that are available in Elbing: I would 
like to send as much as I can to the Pregel. The Duke of Taranto must have arrived at 
Konigsberg, and the Prussian corps will be on the 9th or 10th at Labiau. General Kleist's brigade 
crossed the Vistula and is on the march to join the Prussians. You will see from the attached 
letter that General Lepin was against my intentions by sending an officer to Memel. You should 
not have suffered it; it was a big mistake. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by lime the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18772. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT THORN. 
Thorn. June 6, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Viceroy to leave on the 7th of Soldau to carry his headquarters to 
Bastenburg, where he will arrive on the 12th; to place the headquarters of the 3rd Cavalry Corps 
at Létzen, occupying by his light cavalry Oletzko; to place the headquarters of General Saint- 
Cyr's corps at Ortelsburg, occupying by his light cavalry Johannisburg and Arys, and 
corresponding with the light cavalry of Prince Poniatowski, who will occupy Nowogrod. The 4th 
corps will thus occupy Drengfurt, Hoessel, Sensburg, Bischofsburg. 

Order the Duke of Elchingen to direct his corps by Allenstein, Wartenburg, Seeburg, as 
far as Passenheim, Bischofsburg, Bischofstein, Schippenbeil, and Gerdauen. He will not do 
anything by the road of Guttstadt and Heilsberg, neither cavalry nor infantry, to leave this road 
free. He will take his headquarters to Gerdauen. The 2nd Cavalry Corps will be established at 
Nordenhurg, having light cavalry on Goidap and Durkehmen. It is fitting that this movement be 
done on the 12th. He will have furnaces built in Gerdauen. He will occupy Schippenbeil, 
Gerdauen, Friedland. Altenburg, Nordenburg.*”° 





473 


Page 474 


Order the Duke of Reggio to send his army corps through Mohrungen, Liebsladt, 
Wormdilt, Landsberg and Preussich-Eylau, where he will carry his headquarters. He will leave 
on the 8th to be on the 12th. Nothing will pass either at Gultstadt, Heilsherg, or Burtenstein, He 
will occupy Dornnau, Kreuzburg, Laudsberg, Zinten, He will draw his provisions from 
Brandeuburg, Bruunsberg, and Heiligenbeil; he will place his cavalry in the most favorable 
place, but in such a way as to be able to go in two: steps on Wehlau; his corps will be there as in 
reserve. 

The engineering parks and bridges must have been ordered to go to Heilsberg. 

You will order the Duke of Danzig to direct the brigade of chasseurs which arrives the 
9th at Osterode on Gullsladt, where it can be the 10th, it must not pass by Alienstein. The 
grenadiers who arrive on the 10th will go on the 11th to Guttstadt, so that the Guard will pass by 
Heilsberg and Guttsladt. She can arrive on the 12th at Heilsherg. The small headquarters will go 
to Heilsberg. 

Order the Prince of Eckmiihl to bring the head of his troops to Konigsberg on the 9th, and 
to carry him personally if he thinks fit, and to direct his columns so that his headquarters are 
placed at Instorburg, and that Tapiau, Wehlau, and Insterburg were occupied by his corps 
d'armee. The 1st Cavalry Corps will be at Gumbinnen, the Light Cavalry will be placed in the 
direction of Rovno, Georgenburg (1) and Olitta, relying on that of the 2nd Corps, All Cavalry 
Brigades of its Army Corps will be placed between the Niemen and the Pregel, on the outlets of 
Tilsit, to cover his divisions, The Prussians will occupy the 9 Labiau, having a first line of 
cavalry along the Niemen. They will occupy Tilsit and upstream a column with two artillery 
batteries on the tip, opposite Memel. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18773, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig. June 7, 1812, 


My Cousin, it is necessary to have at Marienburg a store of 10,000 quintals of flour. The 
prince of Eckmiihl has fled there to carry 5,000 quintals: of corn, which will be converted into 
flour; give the order 





1 Yourbourg in Russian,’ 





474 


Page 475 


the intendant general and, for a quicker execution, General Rapp, to send from Danzig to 
Marienburg 5,000 quintals of flour, which will complete this store at 10,000 quintals. Give 
orders to build at Marienburg, with the workmen of the country (not to employ those of the army 
who must all be forward), six: ovens; the furnaces of the city can supply 8,000 rations of bread; 
the six furnaces will supply 18,000; thus, in case of event, this city could feed an army corps. It 
will be sufficient for these furnaces to be built in the course of June. Order also that the six ovens 
of Marienwerder be finished during the month of June, and that there be in this city a store of 
3,000 quintals of flour provided by Thorn's store. 

By this means I shall have on the Vistula a store at Thorn, at Marienwerder, at 
Marienburg, and at the central store of Danzig. 

Reiterate the order to Gdansk, Elbillg, Marienburg, Bromberg, and Thorn, that they 
should grind as much as possible; for in armies of her strength, it is always possible to procure 
wheat, but not flour, if one does not take it two or three months in advance. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18774. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN ELBING, 
Danzig, June 8, 1812, 


Cousin, I chatted a moment with your officer. He told me that the Niemen was 60 toises 
wide at Tilsit; that he had not measured this river at Kovno; that, however, he had made the 
recognition of it, and had judged its breadth only by evaluation. I did not think it expedient to 
hear it more, I send it back to you. If this officer is accustomed to doing his reconnaissance and 
making a mistake of two-thirds, he will often mislead you. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl, 


18775 - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig. June 9, 1812. 


Cousin, let the governor of Danzig know that the garrison of this place is composed of: 
deposits of the Ist corps, forming*’ 





475 


Page 476 


1,300 men; Guard deposits, 100; a depot battalion of the 10th, 11th and 5th Polish, 600; five 
French, Polish and Bavarian artillery companies; a Wiirttemberg regiment of two battalions and 
1,300 men; of Regiment No. 5 of the Princely Division, coming from Berlin, with two battalions 
and 1,300 men, and the depot of the Polish Lancers regiment of Warsaw, whose turn it is to 
activate; that all these troops present a force of about 6,000 men, independently of the 
detachments of workmen and sailors of the navy; that, apart from these forces, the Daendels 
division, composed of the brigade of Berg, with 5 battalions and 14 pieces of artillery, the Baden 
brigade of 5 battalions and 8 pieces of cannon, and the cavalry brigade of General Delaitre, 
strong of two: allied cavalry regiments, forming 1,200 to 1,500 horses, goes to Danzig; that this 
division must take a position there and be, under the governor's orders, responsible for the 
defense of this important place, the custody of Danzig's communications with Pillau, Danzig 
with Stettin, and the preservation of tranquility on the rear of the army between Oder and Pregel. 

That General Hogendorp is Governor of Konigsberg; that he has under his command 
three Westphalian battalions and a Baden battalion for the defense of Konigsberg, Pillau, and the 
point of the Nehrung. That the general in charge of the defense of Marienburg and Marienwerder 
has under his command a Westphalian battalion. 

Finally, a Polish general is at Thorn with five battalions. You will advise the governor of 
Danzig to keep correspondence with all these commanders, and to have a column between 
Danzig and Pillau, so that, Pillau or the tip of the Nebrung being threatened, this division can 
march at once to its defense; to have a column between Danzig and Kolberg, so as to guard the 
coast, to prevent the enemy from taking up language and landing; to place the right column so 
that it can quickly come to the aid of Hela's point. 

Signals must be drawn up so that, when the place comes to be threatened with 
disembarkation, all the forces meet quickly to oppose it, to prevent the place from being 
surrounded, or to any event to be shut up there; and all this would make a garrison of 18,000 
men. In the event of an unexpected and considerable landing, General Rapp could summon the 
Thorn garrison, a detachment of the Kolberg garrison, and what would be available at Posen. 

You will make all of these provisions known to the general’”° 


476 


Page 477 


Hogendorp; you will say something to the commander-general at Thorn, who will have a 
correspondence with the governor of Danzig, so that he, according to the urgency of the 
circumstances, could send him a part of his world if he were threatened. 

The present commander of Danzig fort is utterly incapable; he must be sent back to 
France and appointed a brigadier general or a colonel to command the place. 

Let me know who the deputies are, who are the commanders of the different forts, to 
complete the service of the place in French officers. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18776. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig. June 9, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Prince Eckmiihl to tell the Prussian general that all that belongs to Pillau 
belongs to Prussia; but, as we are ahead, the rifles found there would be useful to us; that I will 
return such a number of French rifles to Berlin; that I will do the same for all that we will be 
forced to take at Pillau, munitions ammunition. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18777. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig. June 9, 1812. 


Cousin, you will order General Delaborde, commander of the 1st Division of the Guard, 
to leave Marienburg on the 10th to go to Konigsberg, having made good marches. Order the 
Marshal Duke of Treviso to go to Marienburg on the 9th to command this division, and to remain 
at Konigsberg with her. Give him the order to form a small depot of the sickly men and useless 
effects, as did the Guard at Thorn, and to send this deposit to Gdansk, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war.*”” 


477 


Page 478 


18778. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG _ 
Danzig, June 9, 1812. 


My cousin, order General Eble to leave Heilsberg to be returned on the 13th, at the latest 
on the 14th to Friedland, Ist with the deck crew, 2nd with the Danube battalion, 3rd with the 4th 
battalion. Flotilla crews, 4th with the great engineering park, 5 ° with the Guard Corps of 
engineers. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18779. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig, June 10, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Duke of Istria to assemble all the grenadiers on horseback, the 
dragoons and chasseurs of the Guard and their artillery, which had to arrive on the 10th at 
Osterode, on Heilsberg, where they will arrive on the 12th or 13. Give him the same order for the 
artillery of the Guard, with the exception of the parks which General Sorbier is master of 
disposing as he will hear. 

Order Claparede's division, which arrives on the 11th at Osterode, to leave on the 12th to 
go to Bartenstein. Order all these corps to complete their bread provisions at their passage at 
Osterode. 

Order the Boguet Division, which arrives on the 12th at Marienwerder, to procure food 
for ten days and to leave for Schippenbeil. 

Order the Duke of Danzig that the division of the old Guard, which arrives on the 13th at 
Heilsberg, departs on the 14th for Schippenbeil. 

Order the Duke of Elchingen to evacuate Schippenbeil and Bartenstein. 

Order the small headquarters in Heilsberg to go to Schippenbeil. Order all my luggage to 
go to Schippenbeil. As for the great headquarters, present me a plan to divide it better than it has 
been until this hour. The headquarters of the Major General and the Intendant should be 
distinguished. I wish to send the intendant's headquarters to Konigsberg, since I must feed 
myself there. I wish him to have with him his offices, the paymaster general, the chief physician, 
and all the heads of service; but it takes the chief surgeon, the ambulances and*’ 


478 


Page 479 


all that is needed for a battlefield joins the small headquarters. Your headquarters must consist of 
the least necessary part of your staff and offices. Order the headquarters to leave Osterode 
tomorrow to be returned on the 13th to Konigsberg. 

Order the Prince of Eckmiihl to send out his engineering park, which arrives on the 11th 
at Konigsberg; let him know that it is advisable to return to Insterburg as soon as possible, 
because it may be necessary for the work of the bridges. 

Make known to the Duke of Taranto the position of the corps of Prince Eckmihl. 

Order Prince Eckmiihl as soon as he is assured that the Duke of Taranto is occupying 
Tilsit, he must direct his light cavalry a little further to the right, on the road to Georgenburg. 

Order General Eble, who is due to arrive at Friedland on the 14th, to continue his 
movement on the 15th, to be returned on the 16th or 17th at Insterburg. 

Tell the Prince of Eckmihl that his headquarters must be returned to Insterburg. 

Order the King of Naples to be returned, with the staff of the cavalry, on the 13th or 14th 
at Gumbinnen. 

Write to the viceroy that I have just received the Nat of his troops on the 18th; that it is 
necessary that its seamen, its engineers, and all that is necessary to assist the passage of the 
bridges, should reach Rastenburg; that the cavalry brigade which goes to Johannisburg must be 
the Bavarian brigade, but that the two brigades attached to its corps must be at Nikolaiken and 
Rhein. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18780. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig, June 10, 1812. 


Cousin, I'm leaving tomorrow for me to go to Konigsberg, where I'll be on the 12th at 
two o'clock in the morning. Make it known to Heilsberg, Osterode, Thorn, Warsaw, the King of 
Westphalia, and General Eble. Make known to Warsaw, to the general who commands it, that 
after having passed the review of the corps of the prince of Eckmiihl, I will go to Warsaw to see 
the 5th corps and the right; that he do all that is necessary to accredit this news. Educate him*” 





479 


Page 480 


Prince of Eckmiihl when I arrived on the morning of the 12th at Konigsberg, where I wish to see 
him before he leaves. 

Order an office of your staff to remain at Osterode for some time, in order to direct all the 
couriers and officers to dispatch on Konigsberg or Gumbinnen, according to the place where the 
headquarters will be. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original Deposit of the war. 


18781. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig, June 10, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia that I suppose that, as I have ordered, the head of 
General Reynier's corps will have arrived at Lublin; that as soon as the heads of the Austrians 
have arrived at Zamosc, which I suppose will take place from the 15th to the 18th, it will be 
necessary for General Reynier to retrogress by forced marches on Praga; that all the 8th corps is 
on Sierock and Pultusk; that the headquarters of the King be carried to Pultusk on the 14th, and 
to Ostrolenka on the 17th, and that the headquarters of Prince Poniatowski be taken to Nowogrod 
on the 18th, occupying the line of Pisek; these movements must take place only from the 15th to 
the 18th; that General Saint-Cyr, with the 6th corps, will be the 16th at Ortelsburg, and will have 
his light cavalry at Johannisburg: the Viceroy will be at Rastenburg; the 3rd cavalry corps at 
Lotzen and Oletzko; that, at this time, the 7th Corps should as soon as possible repass the Narew 
to come and support the 5th and 8th Corps, leaving, however, strong garrisons at Praga, Modlin 
and along the Vistula, until the Austrians, having arrived at Praga, may cover Warsaw and the 
left of the Vistula. 

If the enemy took the offensive on the right of the Narew, whether the King took the line 
of the Pisek, or he backed down on that of the Omulew, the enemy would lend the flank to the 
Viceroy, who would fall to his right. If it was between the Narew and Bug that the enemy came 
to make an offensive move, the 5th and 8th corps could lead by Ostrolenka and Pultusk and fall 
to the right of the enemy. While the enemy would thus sink into operations that would lead to 
nothing, since in the final analysis he would find the Vistula, he would have lost many marches, 
and the left of our army, which would have passed the Niemen, would arrive on his side and on 
his rear before he could get up. What if, on the contrary,**° 


Page 481 


the enemy makes no movement, the King must threaten him, by movements of light troops, to go 
on Grodno and Bialystok, which he must for this purpose advance his pontoons and openly 
announce this project; but the general plan being to refuse the right and to advance the left, it 
would not really be until after the left would have passed and this movement would have had its 
effect on the enemy cantonments of Grodno and Bialystok, that the right should would pursue 
the enemy, in order to occupy him and prevent him from going all the way to the left, without 
ever compromising himself; that it is therefore indispensable to study the positions carefully, not 
to engage in a skirmish and to be well acquainted with the general plan of operations; that he 
must correspond often with the Viceroy. 

You will tell him that [am going to Konigsberg from my person; that I will probably be 
on the 15th at Insterburg; that he must address his letters by Rastenburg, from which the viceroy 
will give them a later direction; that he must always make the rumor that I arrive. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18782. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT WILLENBERG. 
Danzig, June 10, 1812. 


My son, I see from your letter that you will not have arrived until the 18th at Rastenburg. 
The Ist corps will be at Insterburgle 13; the 3rd corps will be in Gerdauen; the headquarters will 
be at Schippenbeil, the Grand Headquarters of the Cavalry (King of Naples) at Gumbinnen; 2nd 
Cavalry Corps at Goldap. 

I leave tomorrow morning to be at daybreak in Konigsberg. I will stay there on the 13th, 
the 14th, the 15th; I think I'll be on the 16th at Insterburg. You will find yourself in the position 
of Rastenburg, twenty leagues from Konigsberg, twenty-four leagues from Nowogrod, and fifty 
leagues from Warsaw. General Saint-Cyr, meeting at Ortelsburg, will be less than eighteen 
leagues from Nowogrod and fifteen leagues from Johannisburg. 

It is necessary that you know what Prince Poniatowski is doing and the news he has, in 
order to be constantly informed of what is new on the right of the army. 

After the 14th, if you had important news, you would have to“! 


481 


Page 482 


send them to me from two directions: Insterburg and Konigsberg. We are still at peace: with 
Russia; however, here we are at the last moment. If the enemy took the offensive on you, you 
would be supported by General Saint-Cyr; the 2nd Corps, the 3rd Corps, the Guard, which will 
be at Schippenbeil the 11th and even the 1st Corps, which is on the Pregel, would easily come to 
your aid. 

Change your line of operation; do not take it by Plock and Willenberg, but by Thorn and 
Osterode on Rastenburg, that should not stop you from drawing the resources you can get from 
Plock. 

If the enemy took the offensive on the Ist corps, you would receive orders on what you 
would have to do. If he took the offensive on your right, that is to say on the 5th corps, which up 
to this day is still behind the Omulew; you would fall easily on the right flank of the enemy. If it 
were necessary, the 5th Corps could make retrogressive marches to join the 7th and 8th corps 
and draw the enemy to Pultusk. You could, if necessary, be supported by some corps of the left 
and fall on the right of the enemy. Hear this with the King of Westphalia and Prince 
Poniatowski. 

The march of the army is a movement that I am doing on my left, constantly refusing my 
right, since the 7th corps, which is going partly on Lublin to make believe to the enemy that it 
will meet with the Austrians to march in Volyn, on the 12th, will quickly relocate to Warsaw, 
making available the 8th corps, which will strengthen the 5th. The 7th Corps itself will soon be 
available by the arrival of the Austrians on Praga. So that around the 20th, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd 
Corps, the Imperial Guard and two cavalry corps will maneuver to pass the Niemen, either 
between Kovno and Grodno, or between Kovno and Tilsit. The 4th and 6th corps, which are 
under your command, and a corps of cavalry, forming the center, will maneuver, having their 
lines of operation on Thorn and the lower Vistula, to be always bound with my left. Worry the 
enemy on the side of Grodno, and when the passage is made, come on forced marches to cross 
the same bridge or pass over Olitta and Meretch, if the enemy does not resist. I will give orders 
for that. Around the 18th, the 5th and the 8th corps will move to Nowogrod, a few days later, 
they will be supported by the 7th corps. This line is destined to keep Warsaw, to remain always 
supported by the Narew, always communicating with you by its left, but keeping its line of 
operation on Warsaw; and in case the enemy was so strong on Nowogrod that the King of 
Westphalia felt*®” 


482 


Page 483 


to retreat a few steps, he would retreat on Pultusk, and the enemy would lend his right flank to 
you, who have your line of operation on the lower Vistula and must remain united with the left. 
The army having passed the Low Niemen, all the right will be able to be carried, according to the 
circumstance, on Grodno or Bialystok, where it would be joined by the Austrian corps. 

I make known to you the various combinations of my march, so that you know well the 
part which you have to fulfill and that you take all the measures to change your line of operation, 
which, after having backed on Thorn, would retreat, it was necessary, on Danzig, that is to say on 
Marienburg, 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by s. A. 1. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18783. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig, June 11, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke de Bellune that the 1st demi-brigade of the 2,400-strong 
Lagrange Division arrives on the 23rd of June at Magdeburg; that even that day the Westphalians 
can leave for Stralsund; that the 2nd arrives on the 25th and the 3rd on the 27th; that these demi- 
brigades may be returned to Berlin on July 1. Let it be known that my intention is that this 
division should be barracked or barracked, and that no one should lodge with the burghers; to 
enter Berlin, and to place them in healthy places, on the side of Spandau, because there are bad 
diseases in Berlin, that these young people would win, and the life of the camps will do them 
good. to the Duke of Bellune it will be about the first days of July that the news of the first cases 
will arrive, that I see with pleasure the arrival of these troops at that time, so that, if there were 
doubtful business, it is In the same period, the Partouneaux division will be entirely confined to 
Stettin and the Heudelet division to the 32nd military division. 

Tell me that I do not want to put French people in Kiistrin, because the air is bad; that it 
would be better, if necessary, to put a battalion of Wiirzburg there. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War.’ 





483 


Page 484 


18784. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN DANZIG. 
Danzig. June 11, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia that, in his letter of the 8th, he makes it known 
that the corps of Bagration returns to Brzesc and that the corps of Essen meets at Bialystok; that 
it is unfortunate that the King has not, in place of his simple analysis, cast off the original 
reports, so that we may compare them with those we have. Tell him that the letter you wrote him 
on the 10th, makes him sufficiently aware of my intentions; but we are. so remote that it is now 
up to him to maneuver, according to the circumstances, in the general spirit of his instructions; 
that the movement of General Bagration on Brzesc may have the object of regaining the marches 
which I have upon him, in order to be able to defend the passage of the Niemen, and to be able to 
cover Vilna with all the forces united to give a battle there; that, if he perceives that the 
movements of the enemy have this goal and that Bagration, of Brzesc, goes back on Grodno, he 
must himself accelerate his movements to go on Ostrolenka and Nowogrod with his army corps 
and always be able to oppose the enemy's left, that is, Bagration's army; if, on the contrary, the 
enemy, perceiving that I come to overtake him by his right, wishes to take the offensive on my 
flanks, a hypothesis which has been calculated in time, and wishes to go either from Brzesc to 
Praga, or from Bialystok on Pultusk, in this case he must also activate the passage of his forces 
on Pultusk and Ostrolenka, in order to keep always the right bank of the Narew and maintain his 
communications with the viceroy; that the viceroy has orders to always lean on my left; that his 
line of operation is on Thorn; that the King of Westphalia must always keep his line of operation 
on Modlin, keep himself always well united, correspond with the viceroy, so that he may fall on 
the right flank of the enemy; that this attacking movement of the enemy, which is natural enough 
and has been foreseen from the beginning, can in no way influence my offensive operations; that 
the important thing is that the right does not commit itself against superior forces and maneuver 
together, from position to position; that if the greater part of the Russian army were to be 
attacked by flank, it could never happen on the right, which would always have for refuge the 
entrenched camp of Modlin and the left bank of the Vistula; but as soon as such a movement on 
the part 


484 


Page 485 


Russians would be decided I would fall with all my army on their right flank and on their rear; 
that it is very difficult for the enemy to expose himself to total loss; that, if he does so, the march 
which has just been traced must make known to the King how he must act. 

Send an intelligent aide-de-camp to Prince Poniatowski; let him come back to 
Schippenbeil and bring us news from the right and what we think on this side. Tell this officer to 
make sure if the enemy wants to take the offensive, or spin to regain his right. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18785. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN ORTELSBURG. 
Danzig, June 11, 1812, 


My son, I will be at Konigsberg tomorrow. I sent you yesterday an officer of the order; I 
still send you an officer before leaving. My little headquarters is going to Schippenbeil. I 
suppose you have news from Warsaw. I ordered you to send officers directly to Prince 
Poniatowski and to send also to the King of Westphalia, in order to hear from the right. My latest 
news from Warsaw is 8; it was then said that Bagration's army was coming up on Brzesc, from 
Lutsk where he was, and that of Essen was on Bialystok. You must have had accurate news of 
that of Essen by Prince Poniatowski and the prefect of Lomza. It seems to me that I asked you to 
have staff officers with respect to Grodno and Lomza. I suppose you are well acquainted with the 
course you must follow; instruct General Saint-Cyr. Assuming the true news that Bagration is 
going back to Brzesc, I do not think he can be reunited before the 16th. As for Essen, as he was a 
short distance from Bialystok, if he wanted to meet there, he will have been very soon. In this 
movement, the enemy can have two goals: or to run quickly north to defend the Niemen, seeing 
that I have already won many steps, and try to arrive to cover Vilna, and then your role is to be 
the same as that of the army; or else, from Bialystok and Brzesc, he will take the offensive by 
falling on my flank, and debouching from Bialystok on Ostrolenka, from Brzesc to Warsaw, and 
perhaps even from Grodno.*® 





Page 486 


I made known to you in these circumstances what you had to do, which is always to support you 
on the left, to change your line of operation and to make sure that the enemy does not begin 
anything. But nevertheless I continue in my project, and, if he embarks himself thus, I will find 
myself having passed the Niemen and be on his rear. 

Please write to Prince Poniatowski and the King of Westphalia to know if all these 
movements are well understood. The King, with his three corps on the right, having his line of 
operation on Modlin, must beat the enemy if the enemy is inferior, and dispute the ground if he 
is stronger. Assuming that the enemy with considerable forces was stubborn in his movement, I 
would not see any objection to the King withdrawing into the entrenched camp of Modlin, 
occupying Praga and the bank of the Vistula. Your operation liana lying on Thorn, you would 
have nothing to fear from this state of things. 

As soon as I know the plans of the enemy, I will get closer to my person from 
Schippenbeil, in order to be better able to give orders. 

But, I recommend it to you, arrange the pickets so as to frequently have news of Prince 
Poniatowski and of the right. Independently of the posts, which are often badly mounted, your 
officers may pick up picket horses placed every three leagues. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. 1. The Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18786. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE. 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Konigsberg. June 13, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, cohorts beginning to arrive near Cherbourg, I think it would be necessary 
to run one of the demi - brigades on Bayonne. This would have the double advantage of 
removing consumers from a point where subsistence services are difficult, and strengthening the 
Bayonne reserve. 

I also believe that you have sent for the 5th half-brigade, consisting of the 26th, 82nd, and 
66th detachments, which meet in the 12th Military Division and must be completed. I suppose 
you also directed the 3rd and the 105th on Bayonne. It is necessary to have a lot of forces on this 
side. Send some brigade generals there.**° 


486 


Page 487 


Make a flyer to activate the clothing of the cohorts. There is some embarrassment in 
some places. The prefects of the chief towns must make all the necessary advances to squeeze 
the confections. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18787. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG. 
Konigsberg. June 13, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the Seventh Division to meet for the purpose of reviewing it 
tomorrow, the 14th, and leaving on the 15th to proceed to Labiau, under the orders of the Duke 
of Taranto. Two battalions of this division will remain at Konigsberg to augment the garrison. 
You will order the Duke of Taranto to set in motion on the 16th, to occupy the 18th, with a part 
of the Prussian corps, Tilsit, the 19th, with the Grandjean division, the country opposite 
Georgenburg. These divisions may be placed two leagues behind, so that they have their outposts 
and companies of voltigeurs on the river. The left of the Prussians will be at Labiau; the light 
cavalry will cover the whole river, and correspond on the right with General Bruyere's light 
cavalry division. 

The cavalry of the Duke of Reggio will push from Wehlau posts on the corps of the Duke 
of Taranto. Prince Eckmihl will have his two brigades on the road from Georgenburg to Tilsit. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the original. Deposit of the war. 


18788. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY IN DANZIG, KOENIGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 13, 1812. 


Cousin, I am sending you a letter from the authorizing officer Deschamps, dated this day, 
which makes known the bad situation in which the second corps is in terms of subsistence. The 
fault lies entirely with the Duke of Reggio and the authorizing officer. If the duke had written to 
you every day to inform you of his situation, and if the authorizing officer had likewise written 
to the intendant general, one would have known what to expect and provided for. Write to the 
Duke of Reggio that he does not render any account. Give him the order to send his contributions 
twice a day; to write what is new and what is relative to the administration; that his corps is the 
only one we do not know**’ 





487 


Page 488 


not every day the situation. Also write to his chief of staff to express my dissatisfaction: the 
moment I knew the shortage where the 2nd corps was, I ordered that, independently of the 4,000 
quintals which were granted to him at Wehlau by My decision of this morning was to-day sent 
2,000 of Konigsberg to it, and that another 4,000 quintals were also at the disposal of the Duke 
of Reggio at Konigsberg: I still order that 200,000 rations of biscuit and 40,000 rations of biscuit 
bread be made available to him; but it is essential that he send cars. Tell this marshal that he must 
go to Wehlau, and from there follow the movement of the army; that there will only be one day 
left in Wehlau; it is therefore important that he take steps to have all these supplies, which will 
provide him twenty or twenty-five days of food. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18789. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG. 
Konigsberg. June 13, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Duke of Danzig, the Duke of Istria, and General Sorbier, 
commander of the Artillery of the Guard, to direct their movements in a manner, without, 
however, fatiguing their troops, to arrive on the 17th or the 18th at Insterburg, Order large and 
small headquarters to direct their march so as to be the 17th at Insterburg. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18790, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 13, 1812, 


Cousin, order the King of Naples to leave Gumbinnen on the morning of the 16th, and to 
carry his headquarters on the 18th to Wilkowyszki; to place the Bruyere division on the three 
directions of Insterburg, Kovno and Preny, the two divisions of cuirassiers of the Ist corps 
between Stallupcebnen and Wirballen, and to carry the headquarters of the 2nd corps on the 17th 
at Kalwarya, the light cavalry on the direction of Olitta, Meretch and Grodno. 

The 3rd Cavalry Corps is to carry, on the 17th, its headquarters**® 





Page 489 


in Oletzko, with posts in the direction of Meretch and Grodno. 

The Ist and 2nd corps will obey the King of Naples; but the 2nd corps will report to the 
Duke of Elchingen, whom he covers, all the news he will learn. 

The 3rd corps will remain under the orders of the viceroy; but he will receive the order of 
the general staff of the cavalry to conform to it, whenever this does not leave the system in which 
the viceroy is. 

NAPOLEON. 

P. S. Address orders directly, for the 2nd Cavalry Division and for the 3rd, to the Duke of 
Elchingen and the Viceroy, informing them of the order that these divisions must receive from 
the King of Naples, 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18791. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT KOKNIGSRERG. 
Konigsberg, June 14, 1812. 


Cousin, it is time for you to think of organizing the rear of the army and taking your 
measures to make this organization complete. The hospitals, the stores, the post offices and even 
the police department are not organized anywhere. The commanders of weapons are not yet 
established. I have appointed a governor of old Prussia, who lives at Konigsberg. There must be 
local commanders at Pillau, Tapiau, Wehlau, Insterburg, Gurnbinnen, Stallupohnen, 
Wilkowyszki; there must be Elhing, Marienburg, Marienwerder, Bromberg, Thorn and Posen. 
The line of communication of the army at Konigsberg will be by Wilkowyszki, Insterhurg, and 
Wehlau. That of the army with France will be by Insterburg, Wehlau, Friedland, Gutlstadt, 
Oslerode, Thorn, Posen, Berlin, Magdeburg and Mainz. 

Reiterate your orders that no single man should pass the places of Thorn, Marienwerder, 
and Marienburg; but that they be united to be then sent to the army by marching companies of at 
least 100 men. Order the general of the artillery to have guns at Thorn, as well as at 
Marienwerder and Marienburg, in the works of the bridgeheads, in order to arm all the isolated 
men who would pass there, returning from the hospitals.**” 


489 


Page 490 


When the army has passed the Niemen, we will do the same thing: we will designate two 
or three points where all the men returning from the hospitals will have to be united, and from 
which they will leave only well armed and well dressed. 

Give me the state of the officers to be commanders of arms, and propose me the work of 
organization of the places. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18792. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG., 
Konigsberg. June 14, 1812, 


My Cousin, I have ordered to establish at Konigsberg hospitals for 12,000 patients. Order 
the governor to have the necessary premises immediately chosen. Write to the Prince of 
Eckmiihl to have the premises necessary for the hospitals which I have ordered to establish at 
Gumbinnen and Stallupohnen for 1,000 men each; to the King of Naples, for those who will be 
established at Wilkowyszki, Wirballen, Kalwarya, and Mayampol; to the Duke of Reggio, for 
those of Wehlau and Tapiau, and to the orderer of my Guard, for that of Insterburg; to the Duke 
of Elchingen, for those of Goldap, Angerburg and Darkehmen, Each of these hospitals to receive 
1,000 patients, I will have on the Pregel and Alle hospitals for 24,000 sick or wounded. Defend 
accordingly any evacuation, without my order, lower than old Prussia. 

NAPOLEON, 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18793. - TO MARECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN INSTERBURG, 
Konigsberg, June 14, 1812. 


My Cousin, your aide-de-camp brings me your second letter on the navigation of the 
Pregel. I have just ordered that 20,000 quintals of wheat be distributed between Wehlau, 
Iusterburg and Tapiau, to be converted into flour. I have sent 50 elite gendarmes to General 
Durosnel, whom I commanded the place of Wehlau up to that this great supply should be 
consumed, and that a commandant of the place should have been appointed. I am also 
responsible for appointing temporary storekeepers and taking all necessary conservation 
measures. Organize same stores in Insterburg, in” 





490 


Page 491 


Gumbinnen, Wilkowyszki; the men you put there will then be replaced by the army storekeepers 
when the headquarters arrives. Made, go to Gumbinnen all that is transported on the ground; it 
will always be a step forward. You must have received from the Major General the order that 
your corps be assembled on the 17th in Gumbinnen. The Duke of Reggio must be on the 16th at 
Wehlau, and the Guard on the 17th at Insterburg. I expect you have a handling in Gumbinnen; 
when it is established, send one to Wilkowyszki. Place relays as you ordered. If the boats can 
carry only 10 quintals, it would be necessary to gather 500 boats, which would make means of 
transport for 5,000 quintals per voyage. It would be proper if all the resources available in the 
country could be used to transport Wehlau's flours to Insterburg, and all the means of transport 
from Koenigsberg to Gumbinnen. From what Thomas tells me, it seems that he is going to send 
about 8,000 quintals to Gumbinnen. It is important to immediately return these cars to Wehlau, 
to make a new trip from Wehlau to Insterburg. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18794. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 15, 1812, 


My cousin, order the commander and the senior officer of the 17th Flotilla Crew 
Battalion, with all the sailors of this crew at Dunzig, to proceed without delay to Konigsberg. 
Only one company will remain for Danzig's service. A complete company of the same 17th 
battalion will be in charge of the defense of Pillau, it will have two small gunboats (which 
already exist) and three to four large canoes, the best walkers to be found at Konigsberg and 
Pillau, which will be armed as many oars as they can carry, and which will first be used to cross 
the tip of Nehruug Pillau, then sentinel on the pass and to be on any barge and other small 
buildings that would try to In the event that Pillau were attacked, that company, with 80 men, 
would serve the batteries, and another company of the same crew would do the same service at 
Memel, where there would be three small French gunboats, irrespective or 


491 


Page 492 


four or five Prussians who exist there. The other six companies of this crew will be employed 
until further notice, one with the Army Siege Engineer and Bridge crew, one with the 
Magdeburg Siege Crew, the remaining four will remain for navigation of the two lakes crews, 
Niemen and Pregel. It is useless to put five seamen per vessel; it is not even necessary to put in 
all; it suffices to have a certain number to correspond in a convoy, and to be able to; in case of 
event, bring them together to help a hand. The 4th battalion of the flotilla will be entirely united 
for the passage of the bridges. 

The battalion of the Scheldt will be divided in two; two companies will remain at Danzig, 
and two will be attached to the workshops at Konigsberg. Accordingly, you will order that two of 
the companies which are at Danzig, wheelwrights and others, leave without delay to go to 
Konigsberg. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18795. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 15, 1812 


My cousin, order the governor of Konigsberg to put an end to all the work which is done 
in the camp at Lochstedt. You will let him know that I have 25 workers in Pillau and a Prussian 
artillery company. He will place the artillery company half in the works of the Nebrung and half 
in the place, mingled with the French gunners. The battalion of the 61st having left the city of 
Pillau, there will be only one battalion of Baden in the city; give the order to send one of the two 
Saxon battalions which are at Konigsberg, so that in Pillau and Nehrung he will have a battalion 
of Baden, 700 men (you will bring in all the detachments he must have. back); a Saxon battalion, 
700 men; a Westphalian battalion, 700 men; two French artillery companies of the siege crew 
(which will remain there until those who are on the way to the JI have arrived), 200 men to a 
Prussian artillery company, 100 men; finally, a company of Prussian invalids, 100 men; so that 
he will have altogether 2,500 men. 

I ordered that 6,000 quintals of Pillau flour should be sent to Koeuigsberg, you will order 
that oe from Konigsberg to Pillau, and by the same vessels 6,000 quintals of grain, 
which 





492 


Page 493 


water-based communications will be grinded in the vicinity, making transportation easy; so that 
there will be the 12,000 quintals of flour that must exist in Pillau's stores. Only one Saxon 
battalion will remain at Konigsberg. You will bring the Westphalian battalion to Marienhurg and 
Elbing. Besides, I ordered that the French battalions at Thorn should go to Konigsberg; you will 
reiterate the order. The first of the three battalions of the Vistula formed at Posen is to proceed to 
Thorn; when the second is formed, he will go to Thorn to replace the first, who will come to 
Konigsberg, and when the third is formed, he will replace Thorn the second, who will also come 
to Konigsberg. You will order that they do not stay in Posen as soon as they are dressed. If their 
rifles have not reached Thorn, they will take them to Konigsberg, where the governor will give 
them Prussian rifles from Pillau; so that in a few days there will be at Koenigsberg a Saxon 
battalion, a Westphalian battalion, three French battalions, and two Polish battalions. 

There must be at Pillau an entire company of sailors of the 17th battalion, 80 strong, you 
will order that the regiment of Saxon light horse which is to arrive at Thorn in the course of June 
is directed on Konigsberg, You order the Governor of Danzig to send a battalion from Baden to 
garrison Marienburg and Elbing. At Danzig there will be four battalions of Baden, two battalions 
of Prussia, one battalion of Wuerttemberg, and the depots of the Ist corps, not to mention that in 
seven days seven battalions of Berg will arrive there. As soon as these 7 battalions have arrived, 
a battalion of Berg will go to the point of the Nehrung, and the Westphalian battalion will leave 
for Konigsberg to join his regiment, my intention being to put him in league. This will diminish 
the garrison of Danzig, which will be no more than 14 battalions. The two battalions of the 
Mediterranean coming from Verona must arrive at Glogau incessantly: I think I have ordered 
you that as soon as these battalions have arrived there Saxon battalions, who are in it, would 
leave for Konigsberg; so that there will be 2 Polish battalions, 4 Saxon battalions, 2 Baden 
battalions, 1 battalion of the Grand Duchy of Berg, 2 Westphalian battalions, plus the Saxon light 
cavalry regiment, 2 Westphalian gun pieces, 4 pieces Saxon cannon; which will form a division 
of 6,000 men with six cannon, You will order the governor of Konigsberg to go himself, as soon 
as possible,*”* 





Page 494 


at Pillau and Nehrung, to have correspondence signals connected between Pillau and Danzig, so 
that they could talk to each other to transmit alarm signals. If the enemy tried something by sea 
on Konigsberg, the governor of Danzig would send a division by the Nehrung for help; and 
similarly, if Danzig were attacked, the governor of Konigsberg would send a division to his aid. 
It is necessary that these two commanders agree. An arms commander at Koenigsberg, a steward 
and a commissioner of war, must be appointed, so that the service may be carried out in good 
standing. It is necessary to leave there an officer of gendarmerie, speaking German, with French 
gendarmes; he will take under his command a part of the company of the Prussian gendarmes. It 
is necessary to send an armorer to establish a workshop in Pillau to repair the rifles which are 
there, which I take on my account; I will return such a number to the King of Prussia from those 
coming from France. We must also have Prussian troops here. Of the three companies of 
artillery, one is in Pillau, the two others will leave for Tilsit to be following General Grawert, he 
will leave them to Memel for the armament of this place, my intention being to arm him as soon 
as he will be busy. All other corps will remain under the governor's orders. The cavalry could be 
distributed in small detachments to Insterburg, Gumbinueu, Stallupcehnen, Rastenburg, Osterode, 
with a commander of arms in each post. These Prussian gun commanders would report to the 
governor. Here in Osterode and Bastenburg there would be a superior commander who would 
each command a portion of the territory. One can thus have 1,500 men for the police, the safety 
of the army and the convoys. The arrested Frenchmen would be sent to the senior commanders 
of Osterode, Rastenburg and Gumbinnen, who would then address them to the governor for trial 
and punishment. 2 or 300 horses would remain here at the disposal of the governor for his 
assistance and to be carried everywhere, as well as the value of a battalion to help in the service 
of the city. You will determine the point of the Nehrung which separates the command of Danzig 
from that of Pillau. A strict police force will be established for fishermen; the best way would be 
to let them sin only in the Frische Haff: it would be to remove from the enemies who would like 
to attempt something against Danzig or Konigsberg the means to be educated. You will inform 
the commandant-general at Pillau that there are too many pieces against the sea and that the land 
has been neglected; the danger is rather on the side of the earth; no enemy will be foolish enough 
to pass 300 yards from the batteries:*”* 


494 


Page 495 


he must be on the side of the land in a condition to support the siege against an enemy who 
should land for it, and give time to the garrison of Danzig to come to his aid. 
NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18796. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG. 
Koeuigsberg, June 15, 1812. 


My Cousin, order the Arancey artillery general, commanding the siege crew at Elbing, to 
send a senior officer from his fleet to take up the navigation of Labiau at Tupiau, and the double 
communication which exists with the Niemen by the channel of Frederick and by the Curische 
Huff. This officer will remain at Labiau and Tapiau; he will check all the passages by himself, 
and will take all the information necessary for the siege crew, when I have given the order to set 
it in motion on the Niemen, to experience in these passes as little difficulty as possible. It may be 
that, according to the information furnished by this officer, General d'Arancey could procure at 
Elbing a number of small boats, which would be of suitable dimensions for the journey from 
Elbing to Niemen, without being obliged to to unload. It seems to me that these boats are in 
Elbing. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18797, - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG, 
Konigsberg, June 15, 1812. 


Cousin, order Bromberg at once that the 30,966 rifles led by the Saxons and destined for 
insurrection be directed to Elbing, where they will remain embarked until further notice. General 
Latour will let me know the day of their order that the 35,000 rifles coming from France by 
Magdeburg and destined also for the insurrection go to Thorn, Reiterate the order to Mainz, 
Wesel, Magdeburg and the Minister of War, so that all the rifles, sabers and other weapons 
destined for the insurrection are directed without delay on the Vistula. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war,” 





495 


Page 496 


18798. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENIGSBERG, 
Koenlgsberg, June 15th, 1812, 


My Cousin, Brigadier General Sokolnicki, will be attached to my military liaison, both to 
act as interpreter and to be in charge of a special service near me. Give him orders accordingly, 
He will enjoy the treatment of French divisional general. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original. Deposit in Ireland, 


18799. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN RASTENBURG. 
Konigsberg. June 15, 1812. 


My Son, you will be ordered to take your headquarters on the 20th to Oletzko and be 
there with your army corps, to place the Bavarians at Lyk and the 3rd Cavalry Corps near Seyny. 
The King of Westphalia will have, on the 30th, his headquarters at Nowogrod. The Duke of 
Elchingen will be at Kalwarya; the prince of Echmihl, to Wilkowyszki; the Duke of Reggio at 
Gumbinnen; the Guard, after the 1st body. My headquarters will probably be in Wilkowyszki or 
Stallupcehnen. The Duke of Tarentum will be at Tilsit, in a position opposite Georgusburg, at 
which time the Austrian corps of Prince Schwarzenberg will be at Lublin, and this will be 
necessary to judge the movements.I calculate that the Russian general Wittgenstein will be 
detained with his three divisions opposite Georgenburg, Tilsit and Memel, and an embarkation 
by the Haff to threaten him, that the other four divisions of the army of Tolly, with the Imperial 
Guard, will be on Rovno and Olitta, that General Essen, with his four divisions, could be 
between Grodno and Meretch, General Bagration on Brzesc and Bialrstok, and in that situation 
my intention is to go between Kovno and Olitta. bridges at once and pass with the Ist, 2nd, 3rd 
Corps and the Guard, and even with the 4th and 6th Corps, quickly emerging on Vilna. In this 
assumption the King of Westphalia would push quickly from Nowogrod on Bialystok to follow 
Bagration: I expect that the first shots will be fired on the 22nd or the 23rd, on the Kovno side. 
As I will be at my Gumbinnen headquarters on the 18th and 19th, I will send you my orders for 
subsequent movements. I will direct you to Kalwarya or Seyny, depending on the circumstances. 
The 6th corps must always support you. The*”® 





496 


Page 497 


passage once done, if the enemy abandoned the river, I suppose you have boats with you; you 
have pontoons and sailors, and you could easily throw a bridge about sixty toises; which could 
shorten you even a walk and you would not have to come over the bridges that I would have 
thrown away. You must also find some means of passage in the country. How many boats do 
you have? It is fitting that you instruct General Saint-Cyr in my plans, that you have an eye on 
what the enemy does on the side of Grodno; that you are in great, safe and rapid communication 
with Prince Poniatowski, and that you do not rely on the post for this, but that it is by the means 
of pickets of cavalry, whose horses serve to the officers in dispatch, that the correspondence can 
take place. 

I do not need to recommend secrecy to you about these provisions. 

Rally all your troops, especially your French troops. If you have cartridges on your rear, 
have them move forward to serve as replacements. Continue to supply Willenberg, if possible, 
unless your convoys can come to the camp. I suppose you will leave Rastenburg with your 
twenty days of food, since I have 900,000 rations at your disposal. However, if what I have given 
you is not enough, I would not mind to give you another 10,000 quintals of flour at Wehlau, 
provided you could send them to take them. When leaving Rasteuburg, form a hospital there, let 
a very good commander of the place and a detachment of cavalry and gendarmerie. Make sure 
the post remains organized. Independently of the commander, leave an officer there who has 
your confidence and who can direct all the couriers of Warsaw and from the right on the place 
where I will be. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. the Duchess of Leuchtenberg. 


18800. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE 5th, 7th AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT WARSAW 
Konigsberg, June 15, 1812. 


My Brother, the Major General, has made known to you your orders, according to which 
you must have your headquarters on the 20th at Nowowod, the Viceroy at Olelzko, and the 
Bavarians at Lyk. Everything leads me to think that the first shots will take place from the 22nd 
to the 23rd.*°” 





497 


Page 498 


The Russian corps of the Left can hardly be informed until the 24th or the 25th. I have nothing to 
add to the general instructions which I have given you, nor in case the enemy should take the 
offensive; it seems to me that everything has been planned, and that in this case my intentions 
have been well explained to you. 

I am taking my headquarters to Wehlau tomorrow, after to Insterburg, and the 18th to 
Gumbinnen. Send me your dispatches by Rastenburg. I order the viceroy to leave there an 
intelligent place commander and a little gendarmerie. The local commander will direct the mails. 
As soon as I have passed the Niemen, I may resolve to walk on Vilna. Then I will lend the flank 
to Bagration's army. It will be necessary for you to follow it closely so that you can take part in 
the movement that I will make against this army. If I could separate it from the rest of the 
Russian troops and fall on its right flank, you would have to be able to attack it at the same time 
as I attack it. 

I have seen two battalions of your brigades, which seemed to me very well; I put them 
online because I thought it was the best way to bring them closer to you. As soon as I can meet, I 
will put them back in your corps. 

The news of the peace of the Turks with Russia is countered. I received letters from 
Bucharest on the 28th, and peace was not made. 

Always make the noise that I come to Warsaw. Do not touch your twenty days of food. 
You must only touch it in the presence of the enemy. There is a great deal of complaint about the 
discipline of your troops: it is said that everyone is doing what he wants. Hold Reynier and 
Vandamme. 

If you arrive on Bialystok and Grodno, it will be convenient to organize the country. You 
will charge Prince Poniatowski with this care. He will put Poles in it. Here you will find 
considerable resources. 

The Saxons have with them a crew of pontoons; bring these pontoons to you on the spot; 
I see that the Poles have some too; it will be precious to you; the Saxons, coming behind, do not 
need it. I have already asked you about the number of pontoons you have. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. Prince J erome, 





498 


Page 499 


18801. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Konigsberg, June 15, 1812. 


My Cousin, the Major General, sends you an order of movement according to which your 
corps must be united at Milkowyszki on the 20th. From Gumbinnen there are only two marches; 
leaving on the 19th, you will be the 20th at Wilkowyszki. The two battalions of the 25th join you 
and pass today to Konigsberg. I ordered that there should not be a single man of the 111th 
tomorrow in Konigsberg. The 4th and 6th Battalions of the 25th left Danzig; that of the 61st also 
left Pillau. A detachment of 200 men from the 25th, whom you had left near Elbing, was ordered 
to join. It is likely that from the 22nd to the 23rd we will fight, and that it will be two steps 
further than Wilkowyszki. It is therefore fitting for you to gather your detachments as soon as 
possible, and especially your French troops. You have for your escorts the troops of 
Mecklenburg and the other German troops; you can not give these chores to the French troops 
and spare them. It seems to me that you do not follow this system enough, which is important. 
As you are enlightened by the cavalry of the 1st Reserve Corps on the directions of Kovno and 
Olitta, place your light cavalry on the direction of Georgenburg, between the Niemen and you. 
Have staff officers on the Georgenburg side and elsewhere, who promptly instruct you of the 
offensive movement that the enemy would make, Consult your situation reports, and recall all 
your detachments. As soon as the carriages which are sent to you from Konigsberg, and which 
bring you 10 to 12,000 quintals of flour to Gumbinnen, will have arrived, I think it would be 
proper that after their unloading you return them at once to Insterburg for to recharge there, and 
then what they bring from Insterburg would take you to your Wilkowyszki camp. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmithl. 


18802. - TO MADAME LA COMTESSE DE MONTESQUIOU, 
GOVERNOR OF THE CHILDREN OF FRANCE, IN PARIS. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Countess de Montesquiou, I receive your letter of June 6th. I can only show you my 
satisfaction with the care that*” 





499 


Page 500 


you take from the King. I hope you will tell me soon that the last four teeth are done. I granted 
for the nanny all that you asked for; you can give him insurance. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by General Count de Montesquiou-Fesensac. 


18803. - TO COMTE BIGOT DE PHEAMENEU, 
MINISTER OF REGLION, IN PARIS. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Count Bigot de Préameneu, I receive your report of June 5th. The priests, being subject 
like the others, are subject to the same oath. But we must distinguish: there is the ecclesiastical 
oath, which has been prescribed by the Concordat; the only penalty I impose on the priest who 
does not wish to lend him is the pearl of the ecclesiastical benefit he enjoys. But the oath of 
obedience to the Constitutions of the Empire and loyalty to the Emperor is due by all the 
citizens; those who refuse to lend him the penalty of my decree. Write, then, to the bishop, and 
make these unfortunate people understand how this refusal would be contrary to their duties. 
When they have taken this last oath, they will only come out of exile. In order for them to be 
able to return to their profits, they must take the oath of the Condordat. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original comm. by the Baroness de Nougaréde de Fayel. 


18804. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, the battalion of the guard of Prince Borghese and that of the Grand 
Duchess being replaced by national guards, I would like these two battalions to ask themselves 
to surrender to the army; and that being so, you would direct them to Berlin. That would make a 
nursery of officers and NCOs that would be useful to me. The Tuscan and one of Piedmontese 
cohorts would serve the palaces of these two princes. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war.” 


500 


Page 501 


18805. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, give orders to the first Neapolitan brigade, which is in Verona, to set out 
on its way to Nuremberg, where it will receive new orders. You will let me know when it gets 
there. 

Order the 2nd Brigade to go from Bologna to Verona. Major General Detrés will remain 
with the 2nd Brigade. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18806. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, all the executives who make up the Lagrange division will soon have 
joined. It is necessary to return from Spain all the useless frameworks. There are, I believe, in the 
interior a good number of frames that are not full. Make me a report on all this. 

Cohort formation is not progressing; you have not yet sent me any state officers to 
confirm, 

I think I have told you that it was proper to send the demi-brigades who were at 
Cherbourg to Bayonne. It is about 4,000 men who will be useful at Bayonne, and whose 
departure will relieve Normandy in terms of consumption. If the circumstances of Spain became 
urgent, you could still, without waiting for my orders, also direct the demi-brigade of Pontivy to 
Bayonne. You see that it would give Bayonne a very considerable mass of forces, since it would 
bring together two cohorts, four demi-brigades forming, I believe, sixteen battalions, and five or 
six battalions of the Bayonne reserve; that would make a total of 22 to 24 battalions or 15 to 
18,000 men; reserve that would put in the case, especially after the summer, to effectively rescue 
the North. 

I recommend you to pay special attention to all the cavalry depots of the Spanish army, in 
order to draw from 3 to 4,000 horses, which would be added to this reserve. 

Also send the 10th, 11th and 12th brigades to Berlin; they are very useless in France, and 
nothing leads one to think that the English can attempt anything.” au 


501 


Page 502 


I ordered that the Paris regiment of march was dissolved upon its arrival at Berlin; 
executives will enter France. 

I would like the two battalions of the 29th, which are in Catalonia, to be returned to 
Erfurt, where they will be united to the two other battalions of the same corps. I ordered the 5th 
battalion of the same regiment to come to Lyons, which would make a very handsome regiment 
available to me. 

Pay particular attention to the proper organization of the Bayonne Reserve, forming a 
good division of three brigades. They can camp in the barracks I have had, which are excellent 
for the troops, and practice well. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18807. - TO VICE-ADMRAL COUNT DECRES, 
MINISTER OF THE MARINE, Paris. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Count Decres, there is criticism of the conduct of the captain who was in Lorient; it is 
said that he could have gone out and rescued the two frigates. He has raised similar suspicions 
about the conduct of the commander of the Danae, who, it is said, could have come out in the 
Rivoli affair. I wish you to investigate these two facts. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18808. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Westphalia that, if the enemy makes no offensive 
movement, it would be preferable for General Reynier, instead of retreating to Praga, to turn on 
Siedlce, which he could do in three or three days. four steps; he would cover there much better 
Pruga and Warsaw; Assuming he speaks on the 18th of Lublin, he may be the 21st at Siedlce; the 
Austrians arrive on the 22nd at Lublin; he will then be in communication with them; the 
Austrians coming to Siedlce on the 25th, and covering Praga, General Bernier will be able 





1) The Ariane and the Andromache; pursued by English ships, these two frigates beached on the Isle of the 
Croix, and were blown up after fighting vigorously.” 





502 


Page 503 


to pass in two days on Brok and form the right of King; in all these positions the principal 
instruction of General Reynier would always be to cover Praga and Warsaw; then it would be 
enough for the last steps to take a Saxon regiment to hold Praga and another to hold Modlin; all 
the rest could maneuver as I have just said above; that we are anxiously awaiting to know 
whether Bagration continues his movement from Brzesc to Grodno; that, in that case, it would be 
proper for the King to press his movement on our right, in order to be nearer to us than the 
Bagration of Vilna; that it would be proper for Prince Poniatowski with his army corps to march 
on Johannisburg, in order to be better able to reach the point of passage, which will be between 
Olitta and Kovno, before General Bagration. 

NAPOLEON 


From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18809. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


My Cousin, write to the Duke of Elchingen that his corps is not moving well enough 
about the road that is being traced to him, and that everywhere he is carrying devastation, the 
Wurtembergers have been misplaced on the Pregel and are interrupting all the systems of the 
army. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18810. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENGSBERG. 
Konigsberg. June 16, 1812. 


My Cousin, it would be necessary to write to the Duke of Reggio that it is necessary that 
he sends all the wagons of his army loaded with flour taken to Wehlau for their loading in the 
shops of Iusterburg, These wagons will then return to recharge at Wehlau. Starting on the 17th, 
these wagons will be on the evening of the 17th at Insterburg: they will be back on the evening 
of the 18th at Wehlau; they could therefore be the 19th at Insterburg and the 20th at Gumbinnen; 
even if they did not arrive until the 21st and Gumbinnen, that would not have a great 
inconvenience, and the Duke de Reggio's corps would have pushed forward 4 to 5,000 quintals 
of flour. 


Write to the Duke of Danzig and the Duke of Istria to send all the*”’ 


503 


Page 504 


empty wagons they would have and all those who are in their suite to take a load of flour to 
Wehlau. Give them even I order to empty the wagons in Insterburg's shops; which would be 
loaded, in order to increase by the same amount the shops and to make the wagons leave on the 
18th for Wehlau, so that on the 20th of that, loaded wagons at Wehlau have rejoined at 
Stallupcebnen. The aim of these movements is to increase the number of shops in Iusterburg by 
the same amount. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18811. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


My Cousin, order the Guard to leave today to go to bed at Tapiau. They will leave 
tomorrow from Tapiau to get as close as possible (a league) from Insterburg. 
NAPOLEON 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18812. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOENGSBERG. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812 


Cousin, the roads of the army between the Vistula and Niemen will be as follows: Thorn 
will be taken for two days to Graudenz; the Prussian commander of Graudenz will supply food 
for a day to Marienwerder; at Marienwerder, supplies for a day to Marienburg, there, provisions 
for a day to Elhing; at Elbing the provisions for three days will be taken to Konigsberg: to 
Konigsberg, stay; we will take the food for a day to Tapiau; at Tapiau, provisions for two days to 
Gumbinnen; in Gumbinnen, two days of food up to Wilkowyszki. Thus the troops will be twelve 
days en route from Thorn to Gumbinnen, including the stay of Konigsberg, they will take a stay 
at Gumbinnen. It will be thirteen days. All intermediate routes will be deleted; however, a 
command with a Prussian garrison, a store-keeper, and a handling department will be kept at 
Osterode, and 10,000 quintals of flour will be maintained there. There will be a similar 
establishment in Rastenburg. 

The communication of the army with Warsaw will be as follows: two days of food will 
be taken at Warsaw to Pultusk; in Pultusk.>”* 





504 


Page 505 


three days of food up to Willenberg; at Willenberg, three days of food up to Rastenburg, where 
three days of food will be taken to Gumbinnen. There will be French commanders, handlers and 
flour stores in Willenberg and Pultusk. 

The communication of Danzig with the army will be made either by Pillau or by 
Marienburg: by Pillau, they will take food for three days at Danzig as far as Pillau; at Pillau, 
provisions for two days to Konigsberg, & c. If the route is made by Marienburg, we will take 
food for two days at Danzig, to Marienburg, whence we will follow the line. 

The communication of Konigsberg to Tilsit will be made by taking Konigsberg drunk for 
a day to Tapiau; at Tapiau, one day of food up to Loebau, where two days of food will be 
provided to Tilsit. 

Thus it is necessary to Thorn a commander of place: he exists there; Marienwerder must 
be a commander and a handler: there are some at Marienburg, Elbing, Konigsberg, Tapiau, and 
Insterburg. A commander is needed at Osterode and Willenberg; there is one at Pultusk; you 
need one in Rastenburg. All other commanders and commissioners of war must be recalled. 

Care must be taken to place French employees in the hospitals to be established, and to 
order them to correspond with General Latour at Elbing and with General Hogendorp at 
Konigsberg for Old Prussia. 

You will order that the roads from Marienwerdcr to Marienburg and Elbing and from 
Marienburg to Dirschau be mended and maintained. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18813. - TO MARECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist BODY OF THE GREAT ARMY IN INSERBURG. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


Cousin, I receive your letter. I have just expressed my displeasure to Marshal Ney over 
the disorders his troops are committing. 

I leave this night to be at break of day tomorrow at Wehlau, where I will review the Duke 
of Reggio's corps. I'll probably go to Insterburg tonight, I think you need the whole day of the 
17th to get together. I will come to your home on the 18th.” 


505 


Page 506 


The 10th corps, commanded by the Duke of Taranto, must border the Niemen as far as 
Georgenburg, the Prussian division must be at Tilsit, and the Grandjean division with 
Georgenburg, but this division must not be in force. Your light cavalry, which you will hold on 
your flanks, but which I nevertheless wish to see in the magazine, must have small stakes to 
assure your flanks. Send an officer from your staff on the Georgenburg side to find out what's 
going on. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original comm. by Madame the Marshal princess d'Eckmuthl, 


18814. - TO GENERAL COUNT DUROSNEL, 
EMPEROR'S CAMP HELP, IN WEHLAU. 
Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 


General Durosnel, take steps to ensure that Wehlau does not carry any oats and that the 
means of transport are used only to carry flours. Put elite gendarmes at the various mills until 
Gumbinnen. Bring markets for Turkish slackers and send wheat to the mills. Put sentries at 
Wehlau; do not allow any wagons loaded with oats to pass; they are all unloaded and reloaded 
with flour and rice. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war. 


18815. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, INSERBURG. 
Insterburq, June 17, 1812. 


My Cousin, order the builders of the Guard to leave in haste to arrive as soon as possible 
to Stallupoehnen and build three operations, each of six furnaces. Order the Duke of Reggio to 
send his builders diligently to Wirballen to build two operations, each of six furnaces. Order the 
Duke of Reggio to send his bakers to Gumbinnen tomorrow, to take the handling of Gumbinnen 
tomorrow at midnight. 

NAPOLEON 


From the original. Deposit of the war.°”° 


506 


Page 507 


18816. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, INSERBURG. 
Insterburg, June 17, 1812. 


Cousin, order General Delaborde to leave Wehlau tomorrow to go back to Insterburg. He 
will leave two battalions at Wehlau for the police station, the guard of the stores and the 
embarkation and disembarkation work. 

Order the General Commanding at Konigsberg to send to Wehlau a Prussian battalion of 
300 men to guard the stores and to work the loading and unloading of the ships. As soon as this 
battalion has arrived, the two battalions of the Guard will leave to join their division at will. 

Recite the order to the Intendant General to reorganize the Wehlau, Insterburg and 
Gumbinnen stores. There are many ways of milling along the Pregel; but they must be exploited 
and put into great activity, and they will offer valuable resources to the army. Recommend to the 
steward to have the ordering officer at Joinville forward the state of all the convoys directed to 
the headquarters of either Thorn or Konigsberg. 

Send a staff officer to the Duke of Reggio to tell him that I passed by the other side and 
so I could not see his army corps, but that I will spend tomorrow in review here, if he arrived 
before my departure; otherwise I will see him at Gumbinnen; that he can send some bakers to 
Insterburg, where they will find flour and where they can make some rations of bread. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18817. - ORDER. 
Insterburg, June 17, 1812. 


The Bromberg Canal and the navigation of the Netze and Warta will be in the best 
condition. 

A commission, composed of an engineer officer to be appointed by the director of 
Danzig, of Senft Senft, advisor to the regency of the New March, and of an engineer to be 
appointed by the Minister of the Interior of the Duchy of Warsaw, will meet on the 25th of this 
month in Bromberg. 

This commission will determine all the work to be done temporarily, without interrupting 
navigation. 

It will remove the piles that obstruct the passages and build the necessary locks, either 
stone or wood.” 


507 


Page 508 


A sum of 100,000 francs, which will be charged to the reserve funds of the Grand Army 
set at 3 million by the budget of 28 May, will be placed at the disposal of the said commission to 
be employed, without waiting for another authorization, the work which will be judged the most 
urgent. 

During the month of July, the commission will send us a report on the system of work 
which it will propose to accelerate this navigation, and the estimate of the expenditure which will 
result from it. 

The Intendant General and the Commander-in-Chief of the Army Engineers are 
responsible for the execution of this order. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18818. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY IN RASTENBURG. 
Insterburg, June 17, 1812. 


My Son, Prescription Officer Tascher handed me your letter. Delay your movement until 
further notice; for above all, you must have food. While passing through Wehlau, I saw the 
convoy of the wagons that you sent, which happens to you. You must also receive the convoy of 
Konigsberg; but it is unfortunate that you have not sent your wagons on a trip to Pillau. Gather 
all your troops under Rastenburg on the 18th and the 19th. Let me know how much bread you 
have on the evening of the 19th. I will then decide to give you a movement order. In this country, 
bread is the main thing. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. * the Duchess of Leuchtenberg, 


18819. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN INSERBURG. 
Insterburg, June 17, 1812, eight o'clock in the evening. 


Cousin, I receive your letter of June 16th. I will not spend tomorrow morning reviewing 
your corps until four o'clock in the evening. I think all this time is needed. 

Have a serious conversation with the Regency to take steps to gather wheat and feed all 
the mills. The deck crew will not arrive tomorrow in Gumbiunen and can only be 21" at 
Wilkowyszki. I suppose you made sure of twenty-five days of food for your army corps, °° 





508 


Page 509 


regardless of the flours worn by the thirteen hundred auxiliary crew wagons. I suppose these 
thirteen hundred wagons carry 8,000 quintals. I count on your twenty-five days of food, on the 
teams belonging to your companies, on the caissons of the corps, on the 12th of the military 
crews and on the two companies of the 14th. Cook as much as you can. I suppose, in the day of 
tomorrow and until the morning of the 19th, your seventeen ovens will be able to cook for all my 
army corps. Your bakers will be replaced at once by those of the 2nd corps, so that you can send 
them to the kilns of Wilkowyszki. 

I spent half of the day today in Wehlau. 

I believe that 3,000 quintals of flour will soon arrive at Insterburg. It's cars that would 
have to be transported; pick up whatever you can. I write to the King of Naples to pick up all the 
cars of his army corps; the cavalry has a great quantity of them, and that ruins us absolutely. I 
ask the king to direct all his empty cars, by convoys of a hundred, to Insterburg to reload them, 
and to escort them you will supply him with German troops. As soon as your seventeen kilns are 
built in front of Wilkowyszki, it will be necessary to build about thirty in front of Kovno. I am 
going to send out tomorrow morning the builders of the Guard and those of the 2nd corps, who 
will join yours to make this construction together, not positively in the same place, but at least 
some distance from each other. Collect as many wagons as you can, and send them to load at the 
Insterburg pier. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marshal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18820. - TO THE GENERAL COUNT DUROSNEL, 
EMPEROR'S AIDE DE CAMP, IN WEHLAU. 
Insterburg, June 18, 1812. 


General Durosnel, if there is still biscuit, brandy and flours in Tapiau, have them left 
there: they will be used to go up on Labiau. Order the War Commissioner to send them to this 
destination; this will be used for our first convoy on the Niemen. Show what's left in Tapiau so 
that we can know what to count on for the Niemen. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy. Deposit of the war.>” 





509 


Page 510 


18821. -NOTE FOR THE MINISTER OF THE NAVY, IN PARIS 
Gumbinnen, June 19, 1812, 


The Minister of Marine will make the Councilor of State ..... that he falls in infancy. 
There is as much ignorance of the facts as of pages in his memoir (1): It is quite simple that a 
state councilor, charge d'affaires of the navy, ignores these questions; but then, if he is not a fool, 
he must not want to rule before learning things. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original comm. by Madame la Duchesse Decres. 


18822. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 19, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Prince of Eckmiihl to set up his ovens at the intersection of the 
Wilkowyszki road in Kovno and that of Kovno in Preny, either in the village of Naugurdyszki or 
at Keturek or Gerwis so as to lean against some church, which can serve as a store. The kilns at 
Konigsberg have been isolated, which is a great inconvenience when there are not a few large 
buildings to serve as stores. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the Original. Deposit of the war. 


18823. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN GUMBINNEN 
Gumbinnen, June 19, 1812. 


Cousin, send an aide-de-camp to the Duke of Taranto. Send him to send out 6,000 
quintals of flour, from that which he has at Labiau at the disposal of the Prussians; to keep them 
embarked to make them slip into the Niemen as soon as the passage is made and the right bank 
cleared; that he should make 150,000 rations of biscuit bread at Tilsit, to embark it and send it to 
the army after the passage; that I wish him to send officers to the right to inform him of what is 
going on; your aide-de-camp will go there; that the duke should go to Tilsit to know the link 
where he can lay his bridge, and that he must choose a favorable location for 





1) Brief entitled Preview of a draft act of navigation for the French Empire, substituted for 
licenses.?!° 


510 


Page 511 


to cover it on the spot with a good bridgehead; let him know how many days it takes for his deck 
crew to reach Tilsit, and to bridge the right bank. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18824. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN GUMBINNEN 
Gumbinnen, June 19, 1812. 


My Cousin, I sent two gendarmes to bring here the two companies of the 14th battalion 
of the crews, which must be two leagues and which carry 1,200 quintals of flour. As soon as 
these two companies have arrived, which must be before daylight, we will pay these 1,200 
quintals to the Guard stores. Here we found 200 quintals of flour. I have already found a 
handling that was no longer default flour. Order, therefore, that the 200 quintals of flour loaded 
on the thirty wagons of the little headquarters be unloaded on the spot, that this unloading be 
done before ten o'clock in the evening, and that the eighteen furnaces and those of the town go to 
all night with the greatest activity. My intention is to have here for eight days bread for the 
Guard, in order to have no more solicitude and to be assured that it does not fail. The Guard and 
the headquarters forming a consumption of 20,000 rations, it will require 160,000 rations for 
eight days, which will employ 1,600 quintals of flour. Of these 1,600 quintals, 1,200 will be 
taken from two companies of the dregs, 200 from the flours that exist here and 200 from those 
that currently exist at the mills. As soon as the two companies of the 14th arrived, the caissons of 
the small headquarters will resume their 200 quintals of flour and will be ready to leave at ten 
o'clock in the morning. We must make every eighteen ovens, so that we can deliver four days of 
food to the Guard tomorrow before noon. The bakers of the Guard will stay all day tomorrow 
and all night, to make for the other four days. All the carriages of the cavalry, all those loaded 
with oats, and all those which may be obtained in the city, will be united to carry these four days 
of food. A commissioner of wars and detachments will be left for this purpose. Give orders 
accordingly. As soon as the two companies of the 14th battalion of crews have been unloaded, 
they will leave for the landing stage of Insterburg,”'! 


511 


Page 512 


where they will take a new load of 1,200 quintals of flour. You will order them to be at 
Insterburg tomorrow, to be back here on the 21st, and then continue on the army. 
From unsigned original, War Repository. 


18825. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Gumbinnen, June 19, 1812. 


Cousin, send General Haxo to go tomorrow vis-a-vis Kovno; he will see the position to 
be taken by the troops, and if the passage is easy from Kovno to Preny, where it will be 
convenient to place the batteries and the bridgehead; finally he will see the breadth of the river 
and collect all the information. 

He will build ovens a league from Rovno, in the most suitable place. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18826. TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 19, 1812, ten o'clock in the evening. 


Cousin, order the viceroy to continue his movement on Oletzko and Suwalki, and to 
make sure that he has had only one day's delay. Let him know that the King of Westphalia will 
be the day after tomorrow, 21st, reunited at Nowogrod. Order the Duke of Reggio to send out 
Legrand's division tomorrow to go to Stallupocehnen with his light cavalry. He will send the two 
other divisions at three o'clock in the morning, giving them a different direction, in order to 
avoid congestion. Let him drive his artillery fleet and all his convoys to the level of a league 
ahead of the camp of the present Ist division, so that the day after tomorrow the Guard does not 
feel any ambiguity on the principal communication. 

Order the builders of ovens of the Guard to continue their movement on Wilkowyszki, 
where they will go with the builders of kilns of the prince of Eckmiihl, in order to build there a 
handling of ten furnaces for the Guard, approximately in the same in law.?? 


512 


Page 513 


Order the Marshal Duke of Treviso, at Insterburg, to remain there tomorrow, to assemble 
Claparede's division, and to take it under his command; to take four days of flour for each of his 
soldiers in their sacks, which will give them four days' bread, and to procure eight days of bread 
for his two divisions in Insterburg, which will give him twelve days of food. You will let him 
know that there is nothing to hope for in ten days. He will take the flours from the stores in 
Insterburg or at the pier, 

From the unsigned original. Deposit of the war. 


18827, - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Gumbinnen. June 20, 1812. 


Cousin, I delayed the movement of the Guard and that of the 2nd corps of a day. The 2nd 
only advanced his 1st division on Stallupoehnen. I wish to learn if your kilns at Wilkowyszki are 
finished and when kilns which I ordered construction a league from Kovno will be finished and 
ready for cooking. Builders need to be accustomed to doing this in forty-eight hours, because 
there would be some inconvenience in unmasking movements a lot before. As soon as the 
passage is completed, we will have to build as many at Kovno. I do not intend to attack before 
the 23rd or the 24th. It seems to me that every day, too, there are many convoys belonging to the 
corps or to the divisions; it is good to let all this happen. 

I sent the builders of the Guard to build a handling for the Guard, near the one you had 
done; it is good that it is not more than half a league distant from the same place. 

I'm throwing the Tilsit Bridge on the 22nd. I hope the bridgehead will be made before the 
Russians go to attack it. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18828. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812. 


My cousin, order the Duke of Reggio to send his 2nd division, which is ahead, tomorrow 
at two o'clock in the morning.°"® 


513 


Page 514 


between Stallupcehnen and Wirballen. The 3rd division will leave at four o'clock to go also 
between Stallupoehnen and Wirballen. Let him know that, as all the Guard follow, it is necessary 
that this departure be done promptly. It will be proper for these divisions to follow the directions 
given by Prince Eckmiihl in order to clear the way. The Guard will leave at five in the morning, 
infantry, cavalry, and artillery, to reach Stallupohnen. The small headquarters will leave at two 
o'clock in the morning to go to Wirballen. The general headquarters will go to Stallupcehnen. 
NAPOLEON. 

P. S. The first division, which is at Wirballen, will leave tomorrow at daybreak to go 
ahead of Wilkowyszki and occupy the camp of one of the divisions of Prince Eckmiihl. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18829. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812, 


My cousin, order the Duke of Elchingen to place his pontooners, his sappers and his 
reserve battery of 12 at his vanguard, so that they may debouch with the first battalions, to reach 
the Niemen, and to favor the passage, when they receive the order. Write to the Viceroy to place 
all his staff bridges, sailors, sappers and reserve batteries from 12 to his headquarters, so that all 
this can be quickly carried to the place of passage and promote the establishment of bridges. 
Write the same thing to the Prince of Eckmiihl and the Duke of Reggio. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original, War Depot, 


18830. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, GUMBINNEN, 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812. 


My cousin, order the viceroy to arrive on the 23rd at Kalwarya with his corps d'armee, 


and the 6th corps between Suwalki and Kalwarya. Let him know that as it is possible that I make 
a bridge by the Duke of Elchingen to Preny or Balwierzyszki, he” " 


514 


Page 515 


presumably that's where it will go. Recommend him to have his light cavalry and the third corps 
observe the outlets of Meretch, Grodno and Olitta. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to original. Deposit of the war. 


18831. - ORDERS 
FOR JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE 5th, 7th AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT PULTUSK. 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812. 


The Emperor orders that the 5th corps starts on the 22nd to be the 25th at Augustowo; 
that the 8th starts on the 23rd to go on Raygrod; that these two corps have with them their twenty 
days of food. The 4th Cavalry Corps will cover these two corps on the Bialystok and Grodno 
Road, and will push its posts on both directions. 

The 6th corps will be at Suwalki on the 23rd, and the viceroy's headquarters will be the 
same day in Kaluarya. The deck crew belonging to the corps will walk with the 5th. 

The 7th corps, which will arrive on the 21st or 22nd at Siedlce, will march on the 23rd on 
Brok, leaving an infantry brigade, with cavalry and artillery, at Siedke, until the Austrian corps 
which must arrive on the 25th, On the 24th, as soon as it is certain that the enemy can no longer 
obstruct the arrival of the Austrians at Siedlce, this brigade will join Brok with his division. 

The 8th corps will be weakened by a regiment left to Modlin and another left to Praga. If, 
in the interval between the 22nd and the 25th, the enemy advances to Warsaw, the brigade which 
will be in Siedlce will be on Praga el Sierock, and the corps which will be in Brok will be on 
Pullusk and Oslrolenka; but this hypothesis is unlikely. General Reynier will still be responsible 
for covering Warsaw, Praga and Modlin. 

On the 24th and the 25th, when the army will take the offensive, the Austrians being in 
position at Siedlce, if the enemy has not attempted anything offensive, the king of Westphalia 
will be able to order the 7th corps to approach of Bialystok and Grodno, supposing that the 
march of the King and the movements of the army accelerate the movement of the enemy on 
Vilna. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the original. Deposit of the war. 


515 


Page 516 


18832. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen. June 20, 1812. 


Cousin, let the Duke of Taranto know that it is necessary for him to collect 150,000 
rations of biscuit bread at Tilsit, so that he can send them to the army by the Niemen, as soon as 
we have passed this river and that we will be masters of both shores. I also want him to gather at 
Labiau 6,000 quintals of flour on boats, to get them up the Niemen as soon as we are masters of 
the river. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18833. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinuen, June 20, 1812. 


My Cousin, the Duke of Treviso, will have the command of the 2nd Division of the 
Guard, commanded by General Roguet, Ist, commanded by General Delaborde, and the 
Claparede Division. He will leave tomorrow with the divisions Delaborde and Claparéde to go to 
Gumbinnen. He will carry food and bread for twelve days; 60,000 biscuit rations are available at 
the Insterburg pier, where he will have them taken. I suppose that General Claparede had a day's 
stay at Insterburg; if he had not, he would be given one. General Roguet, who will arrive at 
Insterburg on the 21st, will receive orders to take for fifteen days supplies of bread, flour and 
biscuit at the wharf. It is necessary that the Duke of Treviso should have a chief of staff, and that 
the administration of the Guard should organize his ambulances and all his administrations. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18834. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812. 


Cousin, send an engineer geographer to sketch the position occupied today by the corps of Prince 
Eckmiihl; send one also to do the one occupied by the reserve of”! 


516 


Page 517 


cavalry. One will follow the Prince of Eckmiihl and the other the King of Naples, to send me that 
every night. You will send one for the same purpose to the corps of the Duke of Elchingen and 
one to the King of Westphalia (the Viceroy having geographers engineers, it is useless to send 
him); so that I have the position of all the brigades of cavalry, divisions and parks put on 
sketches. Give orders to send me this every day. 

According to the unsigned original, War Depot, 


18835. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen. June 20, 1812. 


My Cousin, order the deck crew who arrives today at Wilkowyszki to conduct on 
Maryampol, on the 21st, a crew capable of throwing a bridge of 60 toises, with a company of 
pontooners; the company of pontonniers who is in the 3rd corps, the sappers of the 3rd corps will 
meet there. This deck crew will be under the Duke of Elchingen. The remainder of the deck crew 
will proceed to Kovno, under the orders and custody of Prince Eckmihl, who will regulate his 
movement so that this crew is not compromised and is always covered by his troops. It would be 
proper for this crew to arrive on the night of the 22nd to the 23rd. 

Order the Duke of Elchingen to leave Kalwarya tomorrow and take his headquarters to 
Maryampol, to send no troops more than half a league on the road from Wilkowyszki and 
Wilkowyszki to Kovno, or the bulk of the army is. You will inform him that he will find at 
Maryampol a deck crew capable of throwing a bridge of 60 toises, which he will take under his 
command; that he will join, as I ordered, his reserve battery, his sappers and all the means he 
will have to make a passage. Give him orders, as soon as the furnaces of Maryampol are built, to 
have them built near Preny, but still far enough away for the enemy not to notice. His crew will 
be held a little behind, Let him know that the headquarters will be tomorrow 21 at Wilkowyszki, 
that I want him to keep his corps together as much as possible and that he observes with his 
cavalry the debouches of Olitta and from Meretch. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war.?!” 





517 


Page 518 


18836. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812. 


Cousin, let Prince Schwarzenberg know that on the 25th he will be at Siedlce; that at the 
same time General Reynier will be at Sierock, that in this situation, if the enemy should leave 
Brzesc for Warsaw, General Schwarzenberg would then proceed to Praga, Modlin, Sicrock, meet 
with General Reynier, who would march with him, either to attack the enemy if the enemy were 
weaker, or, if not, to run Siereck, Modlin, and the right bank of the Narew; that the 23rd King of 
Westphalia will be at Augustowo, General Gouvion Saint - Cyr at Suwalki, the Viceroy at 
Kalwarva, and all the left of the army with headquarters, on Kovrio; that it is probable that 
during the day of 23 or 24, the hostilities will begin, and that the offensive that will take the left 
of the army in Courland and Vilna will accelerate the movement of the enemy army from our 
right to our left; that, in this state of things, Prince Schwarzenberg may confer with General 
Reynier to march, either by Bialystok or by Brzesc, following the enemy, and to do him all the 
proper harm, bearing in mind, however, that his The main purpose must be to cover Warsaw and 
Modlin, that it is to be hoped that on the 26th he will be informed of what will have happened at 
Kovno on the 24th and 25th; which will give light on the situation of the enemy, and will enable 
him to receive instructions for his subsequent movements. 

NAPOLEON, 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18837. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN GUMBINNEN 
Gumbinnen. June 20, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Prince of Schwarzenberg that, being informed that the money- 
shipments of Vienna had been delayed and that he needed money, you send the order to the 
paymaster-general to give 500,000 francs at his disposal; that, the payer arriving here until after 
tomorrow, it is not known if there is enough money in Warsaw to make this expense; in any case, 
you order the payer of Warsaw, if he has the funds, to hand them over to the Austrian payer, and, 
if he does not have them, to hand them over at least?!® 


518 


Page 519 


up to the competition of what he has. M. de Parr, passing through Warsaw, will inquire of the 
payer whether he can pay, 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18838. - TO CAPTAIN OF HAUTPOUL, 
EMPEROR'S ORDER OF ORDER, IN GUMBINNEN 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812, 


Mr. Hautpoul's order officer, bring the attached letters to Wilkowyszki, the Prince of 
Eckmiihl and the King of Naples. Then go to the outposts, with General Bruyére; go through the 
outposts all the way from Kovno to Preny, and go back to General Bruyere, where you will stay 
to get a good knowledge of the localities, waiting for my arrival, unless something very 
important; in which case you would come to me. Look especially close to the village of Preny, 
where the river elbows, and the place where batteries should be built and the bridge built 
opposite Kovno. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by General Marquis d'Hautpoul. 


18839. - TO MARSHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Gumbinnen, June 20, 1812, eight o'clock in the evening, 


Cousin, I receive your different letters. I put General Subervie and the Wiirttemberg 
General on the agenda. I suppressed the Wurtemberg brigade and put it to the order of the army, 
that is to say of Europe, I flew to write to the royal prince that he ran the risk of having the 
greater inconvenience if he did not order it; but on your side try to stop one of the looters, to send 
him to the provost of the army, who will shoot him. 

You will see by the orders I have given that I want the crews to pass in a straight line by 
the Kovno road (by the Skraudze road). I detach a crew of 60 toises on Maryampol. I need to 
make my main visit to Kovno, because of the intersection of the two rivers and the greater 
proximity of Tilsit, from where I have to pull my supplies; but the army is so great, that I will 
make a bridge to Preuy, where I will send the Duke of Elchingen and the Viceroy. The crew 
from elsewhere can from everywhere’ 


519 


Page 520 


go to Preny; from Skraudze he can go to Preny; even if it is lower, it can still go. It is necessary 
therefore that this crew passes on the road of Skraudze; but it is very important that the crew and 
the troops are not seen. You must not occupy Maryampol, where the Duke of Elchingen's corps 
is placed. Do not go to Zapiecyszki either, because the way is impracticable and will unmask all 
our movements. Be careful not to show any infantrymen or cuirassiers. The first infantryman to 
be seen by the enemy must be a pontoonist. Leave your bakers at Wilkowyszki's ovens to cook 
every day of the 21st and 22nd on your behalf, unless you have biscuit. I reduced the Guard's 
ration to 12 ounces of bread, 5 ounces of flour, and 1 ounce of rice; by this means we save a lot 
of bread. He has passed here since yesterday carts that carry you more than 4 to 5,000 quintals of 
flour for you. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmiihl. 


18840. - ORDER OF THE DAY. 
Gumbinnen. June 20, 1812. 


The Guard will take in the day for six days of bread that the soldiers will carry on them. 
The ration will consist of the following: 12 ounces of bread, 5 ounces of flour, 1 ounce of rice. 
These provisions will be for the 20th, 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th and 25th. 

Six more days of food will be distributed to the Guard tomorrow. The regiments will 
leave for this purpose pickets and cars per battalion to carry them. 

The bakers will stay today and tomorrow 21 in Gumbinnen to make bread. The Guard 
will have food for the 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th and Ist of July. 

It is recommended that the soldiers spare their food and take care of it. The officers will 
make inspections every morning to make sure that every soldier has only eaten the food day he 
owes, and that he has the rest for the number of days he wants. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18841. lst BULLETIN OF THE GREAT ARMY (1). 
Gumbinnen. June 20, 1812. 


At the end of 1810, Russia changed its political system: the English spirit 





1) Not all the Bulletins of the Grand Army will be found below.*” 


520 


Page 521 


regained his influence; the ukase on commerce was the first act. 

In February 1811, five divisions of the Russian army left the Danube on forced marches 
and went to Poland. By this movement, Russia sacrificed Wallachia and Moldavia. 

The Russian armies assembled and formed, a protest was made against France, which 
was sent to all the cabinets. Russia announced that she did not even want to keep appearances. 

All means of conciliation were employed on the part of France; all was useless. 

At the end of 1811, six months later, we saw in France that all this could only end in war; 
we prepared for it. 

The garrison of Danzig was increased to 20,000 men. Supplies of all kinds, guns, rifles, 
powder, ammunition, and deck-crews, were directed to that place; considerable sums were 
placed at the disposal of the engineers to increase the fortifications. The army was put on the war 
foot. The cavalry, the artillery train and the military crews were completed. 

In March, 1812, a treaty of alliance was concluded with Austria; the previous month a 
treaty had been concluded with Prussia. 

In April, the 1st Corps of the Grand Army moved on the Oder; the 2nd corps went to the 
Elbe; the 3rd corps on the lower Oder; the 4th corps left Verona, crossed the Tyrol, and went to 
Silesia. 

The Guard left Paris. 

On the 22nd of April, the Emperor of Russia took the command of his army, left 
Petersburg, and carried his headquarters to Vilna. 

At the beginning of May the Ist corps reached the Vistula, Elbing, and Marienburg; the 
2nd corps, at Marienwerder; the 3rd corps, at Thorn; 4th and 6th corps at Plock; the 5th corps 
meets in Warsaw; the 8th corps, on the right of Warsaw; the 7th corps, in Pulawi, 

The Emperor left St. Cloud on May 9, crossed the Rhine on the 13th, the Elbe on the 
29th, and the Vistula on the 6th of June. 

Excerpt from the Moniteur of July 8, 1812. 





the campaign of 1812: the Commission has only to reproduce the Bulletins, the manuscript of which contains 
corrections from the Emperor, and those which, because of their exceptional importance, could be regarded as the 
work of the headquarters, and can only be attributed to him the Emperor.” 





521 


Page 522 


18842. - TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, 
MINISTER OF WAR, IN PARIS. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


Duke de Feltre, I receive your letter of June 11, which reports the arrival of six cohorts of 
National Guard at Cherbourg. That being the case, I think that it is proper to direct the two demi- 
brigades which were destined to the guard of Cherbourg on Bayonne, to increase the reserve; for 
I attach great importance to having there a considerable force that can remedy what can be done 
in the North. Let me know what will happen in the course of July, the situation of the Bayonne 
reserve. 

Direct the 3rd battalions of the 127th and 128th on Berlin, by the road which distances 
them more from the 32nd military division; but do not send these soldiers until they are already a 
little disciplined. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18843, - ORDER DICTATED TO MAJOR GENERAL. 
Gumbinneu, June 21, 1812. 


Order to the King of Naples to have Maryampol's 2nd cavalry corps supported on the 
Kovno road, without, however, showing either cuirassiers or artillery on the left bank, and that 
from the right bank no more movement can be seen than usual; but to dispose of it in such a 
manner that his Majesty may pass, on the 28th at noon, if it thinks fit, the bridge of Kovno to all 
Ist and 2nd corps of cavalry with its sixty pieces of light artillery, so that we can beat the 
campaign and hear from the enemy. His Majesty will be at Wilkowyszki this evening, where it is 
fitting that the King of Naples should wait for him. 

The 3rd Cavalry Corps was ordered to be moved on the 23rd between Maryampol and 
Preny, without, however, marching the fatigues. 

Address the order to the Viceroy and the King of Naples. 

According to the minute. Deposit of the war. 


18844. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Prince Poniatowski that he should remember the” 


522 


Page 523 


Russian parliamentarian, treat him well, send his despatches to the General Staff, here, and wait 
for new orders; that henceforth, if he presents himself, it is thus that he must act. Write the same 
thing to the King of Westphalia. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18845, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


Cousin, write to Rear-Admiral Baste that there is nothing to be directed to Wehlau; that 
everything must be sent from Tupiau to Labiau; that he surrender himself to Lahiau, in order to 
speed up the movement on the Niemen, and then the Niemen on Kovno, as soon as Rions will be 
masters of both shores; that these convoys must be made with the greatest activity and need all 
his care, since the army will have no means of nourishment except by this means. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18846, - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


My Cousin, the caissons of the little headquarters have left with half-load; send an 
express on the spot with the order that the whole load be assembled on twenty caissons, and that 
the other twenty, empty, be sent to Insterburg to recharge. Testify man dissatisfaction to the 
authorizing officer..... of what he is going so forward with empty caissons. I have sometimes 
seen carefree administrators, but I have not seen any more stupid, 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18847. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT GUMBINNEN. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke of Reggio to continue his movement tomorrow 22. Legrand's 
division will be on the road to Kovno, two or three leagues ahead of Pilwiszki, so that one day it 
will be able to talk to Kovuo. if it is necessary. The Duke>* 





523 


Page 524 


Reggio will continue his march with his two other divisions, at daybreak, to go ahead of 
Pilwiszki. Its headquarters will be at Pilwiszki, its park in front of Pilwiszki, so that all his army 
corps can cross the bridge. 

Order the duke of Danzig to go tomorrow twenty-two leagues ahead of Wilkowyszki. 

Same order to the Duke of Istria. 

Same order to General Sorbier. 

Order the Duke of Elchingen to go tomorrow, three leagues behind Preny, with the 
detachment of the deck-crew which has been handed over to him, not to let any man of cavalry 
or infantry be seen; but to place himself so that on the 23rd at noon, if the Emperor gives him the 
order, he may pass to the village of Preny. He will take care that from the right bank we see no 
extraordinary movement, and especially no infantryman. 

Order the viceroy to go to Maryampol as soon as he can, so that as soon as possible he 
can cross the river, either at the bridge of Preny or at the bridge of Rovno. 

Order the Duke of Treviso to dispatch Delaborde's division, Claparede's division, and 
Roguet's division, to advance tomorrow to Wirballen. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18848. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN GUMBINNEN, 
Gumbinnen. June 21, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the Prince of Eckmihl to carry with his corps d'armee in the 
direction of Rovno, so as to have arrived on the morning of the 23d, early, with the deck-crew. 
He will place his corps two leagues from the right bank, so that the enemy can not perceive it. He 
will dispose in such a way that the Emperor is the master to throw the bridge over the Niemen on 
the 23rd at noon, and to immediately unload his entire army corps. From the east, maneuvers will 
be made so that the right bank can not perceive any infantry man, nor cuirassier, nor more 
movement than usual. 

From unsigned original, War Repository.” 


524 


Page 525 


18849. - TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICE-KING OF ITALY, 
COMMANDING THE 4th AND 6th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN OLETZKO. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


My Son, you have received orders from the Major General to return to Kulwarya as soon 
as possible. The 3rd Corps Cavalry is ordered to marry Maryampol. The cavalry of your corps 
will serve to enlighten you on Meretch and Olitta. If it is possible, it will be the 24th between 
Maryampol and Preny, in order to cross the bridge that the Duke of Elchingen will establish. 

I ordered the king of Westphalia to carry with the 5th and 8th corps on Augustowo, and 
to march from there on Grodno. 

Hostilities will begin on the 24th. I will cross the river at Kovno. 

Probably I will send the Duke of Elchingen from Kovno to Preny. You will try to be 
ready with your army corps to pass on the bridge. General Reynier is under observation at Brok; 
the Austrians are in Siedlce to cover Warsaw. 

Do you keep in touch with the King of Westphalia? to which I gave orders to press on the 
left and take the line of operation on Konigsberg, in case the enemy should come to his right. 

I will be tonight at Wilkowyszki, and on the 23rd near Kovno. Prepare all your means of 
passage. 

NAPOLEON 

According to the copy comm. by S. A. I. The Duchess of Leuchteuberg. 


18850. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE 5th, 7th, AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY AT NOWOGROD. 
Gumbinnen, June 21, 1812. 


Brother, you will have received orders from the General Staff to take up position on 
Augustowo, and for General Reynier to be in observation corps on Brok or Oslrow. 

The Austrians will, it seems, be on the 23rd or the 24th at Siedlce. General Reynier must 
always aim to cover Warsaw, Pultusk and Ostrolenka. 

You have to press the center. In case the enemy turns your right, or even the line of 
operation will be on Konigsberg, Tachs that the Poles arrive on the 23rd at Augustowo, and have 
an advanced guard on Grodno with many light troops. Advance your bridge in this direction. It is 
probable that I will give you the order to carry you on Grodno with all your army, putting by this 
movement on your rear what is at Bialystok. This” 


525 


Page 526 


movement would evacuate all this province. You will be in continuity with the army, so that 
everything will always give in mass, and one will then operate against General Bagration, 
according to the position which it will occupy. 

Maintain the greatest order, prevent waste. It is complained that the Westphalian officers 
were fed in Warsaw; it's worthless, especially for people who approach you. 

Stand in correspondence with the viceroy on your left. 

General Reynier will be able to reach Bialystok, as soon as you arrive at Grodno, always 
having for principal instruction to cover Warsaw. 

The Austrians will stand in observation against the body of Bagration. 

I have several times sent you to advance the pontoons which the Saxons have on the 
vanguard of the corps. Have your sappers, etc., run there, so that the passage can be made very 
quickly. 

NAPOLEON. 

I'll be at Wilkowsszki tonight. 

According to the copy Comm. by S. A. I. Prince Jerome. 


18851. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Wilkowyszki, June 22, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke of Reggio to leave at daybreak tomorrow, the 23rd, to go to 
Kovno. Its divisions will bivouack a league from the Ist corps, so as to be in three hours' time on 
Kovno. The light cavalry will remain with the corps d'armee and will not exceed it. 

Order the Duke of Danzig to leave tomorrow at daybreak to get as close as possible to 
Kovno. 

Order the Duke of Istria to arrive at my headquarters at Kukta, one-and-a-half leagues, 
before arriving at Kovno. 

Order General Sorbier to advance the thirty-two pieces of reserve as close as possible to 
Kulda in the day of tomorrow, without, however, putting the horses out of service. 

Order the Duke of Treviso to leave tomorrow with his three divisions, and to advance as 
much as possible Roguet's division. He will carry his headquarters ahead of Pilwiszki. 

Order the small headquarters to be returned tomorrow, ”° 





526 


Page 527 


early in the village of Maurucza, four leagues behind Kovno, 
Order a large headquarters to leave, after tomorrow 24, to go to Wirballen, and to be on 
the 25th at Wilkowyszki. 
Write to the Duke of Taranto that I will be tonight at Kukta, a league and a half behind 
Kovno. 
NAPOLEON 
From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18852. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Wilkowyszki, June 22, 1812. 


Cousin, you will send my proclamation to the army (1). Order the marshals commanding 
the Ist, 2nd, 3rd corps, the Guard and the cavalry, to publish it only on the 21st at daybreak. 
Write to the Duke of Taranto that he should make this proclamation known on the 25th to the 7th 
Division, and that, as to the Prussian corps, he should not communicate it to them, but that he 
should make them one to his will, in which he will say in a few words that the war has begun and 
that Russia wants it. Write to the King of Westphalia to make it known to the 5th 7th and 8th 
Corps, only in the morning of the 26th. Send the proclamation to Prince Schwnrzenberg, and, as 
it is not suitable for his army corps, instruct him to substitute for it the one that suits him, only by 
making known that the war has begun. He will publish this communication on the 26th. 
Communicate my proclamation to the viceroy; he will give it to his corps and to the Bavarians 
on the 25th. The governors of Konigsberg and Danzig will publish it on the 27th. Send it, by the 
courier of this day, to my ministers at Vienna and Berlin; send it also to my minister at Warsaw. 
They will have it published only on the 26th. Thus this proclamation will be for the whole army, 
with the exception of the Austrians and Prussians, to whom the commanders of these corps will 
make particular proclamations. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18853. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Wilkowyszki, June 22, 1812. 


My Cousin, give orders to the Duke of Reggio to advance his 





1) See below part no. 18855.°”’ 





527 


Page 528 


spare battery of 12 pieces and howitzers as far as it will be possible on the way to Kovno. Let her 
know that it would be necessary for her to arrive and park with that of Prince Eckmiihl 
tomorrow, 23 with the intention of using this battery to protect the passage. 
Order General Sorbier to advance the battery of 12 of the Guard and to announce when it 
might be near Kovno, wanting to have it to protect the passage, if it is possible that it arrives. 
From the unsigned original. Deposit of the war. 


18854. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN WILKOWYSZKI. 
Wilkowyszki. June 22, 1812. 


My Cousin, General Tarayre, until further orders, will command Kovno. Always have 
him go before me. To this end, he will be under his command of the headquarters gendarmerie. 
Make it happen to Kovno one of the first, to put the order on the spot and to prevent any waste. 
Put General Vedel to command Wilkowyszki until further notice, this point being important 
because of his proximity to the army. Leave him 25 gendarmes and a company of Badois, which 
will be provided by Prince Eckmiihl; that he join to this force some national guards and restore 
order to this part of the department of Lomza. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original, Depot of War. 


18855. - PROCLAMATION TO THE BIG ARMY. 
Imperial district of Wilkowyszki. June 22, 1812. 


Soldiers! the second war of Poland is begun; the first ended at Friedland and Tilsit. At 
Tilsit Russia swore eternal alliance to France and war to England. She is violating her oaths 
today! She will give no explanation of her strange conduct, which the French eagles have passed 
over the Rhine, thus leaving our allies at her discretion. Russia is driven by fate; his destinies 
must be fulfilled. Would she believe us degenerate? Are we no longer the soldiers of Austerlitz? 
It places us between dishonor and war: the choice: can not be doubtful. So let's go ahead: let's 
move the Niemen, let's take the>”® 





528 


Page 529 


war on its territory. The second war of Poland will be glorious to French arms, as the first. But 
the peace which we shall conclude will carry with it its guarantee and put an end to the fatal 
influence which Russia has exercised for fifty years on the affairs of Europe. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18856. - ORDER FOR THE ARMY. 
Imperial District of Wilkowyszki, June 22, 1812. 


TITLE 1. 


The Emperor orders the marshals and generals commanding the army corps, the generals 
commanding divisions and brigades, and the corps commanders to take all necessary measures to 
keep the army in the greatest order and to prevent disorder who are starting to desolate the 
country, accordingly: 

1. Every marshal or general commanding a corps d'armee shall appoint a provostal 
commission composed of five officers, before which shall be brought any soldier who, after the 
army, has been absent from his regiment without any legitimate cause, any marauder, Anyone 
who is caught is either plundering or molesting the inhabitants of the country. This commission 
will condemn the culprits to death and have them executed within twenty-four hours. 

2. There will be established at Maryampol, for the department of Lomza, a provostal 
commission of five officers, with whom will be formed a mobile column, composed of 200 
inhabitants of the country (national guard), 10 gendarmes and 40 men of French cavalry. This 
column will be commanded by a general or superior officer, French. It will be subdivided into 
ten small columns or patrols, each of twenty-five men, who will cross the country in all 
directions and stop any straggler or marauder and any troublemaker. Arrested individuals shall 
be brought before the Maryampol Provost Committee and, if guilty, sentenced in accordance 
with the above. 

3. There will be a Provostal Commission for the province of Konigsberg, which will sit at 
Konigsberg; it will be composed of five officers and organized by the governor of Konigsberg. A 
mobile column consisting of 100 men of Prussian cavalry, 200 men of Prussian infantry, 10 
French gendarmes and 40 men of cavalry and infantry will be formed under this French 
committee.” 


529 


Page 530 


This movable column will be divided into ten small columns, which will traverse the country in 
all directions, arrest the marauders and laggards, all the individuals informed of crimes, and 
translate them to Konigsberg before the provost commission. 

4. A Provost Committee will be established in Warsaw under the orders of General 
Dutaillis, Governor of Warsaw, who will be responsible for its organization. 300 men of Polish 
troops in the Grand Duchy and 10 gendarmes will form the mobile column, which will be 
divided into ten small columns charged with covering the departments of Warsaw, Kalisz, 
Krakow, Lublin, and Siedlce. The National Guard will lend them everywhere a hand, and any 
traitor, marauder, etc., will be arrested and judged by the Warsaw Provost Marshal. 

5. There will be such a commission in Posen, 300 men of the National Guard, of the 
Polish cavalry, 10 French gendarmes and 20 men from the depots will form the mobile column, 
which will be divided into 10 small columns, to traverse the departments of Posen and Bromberg 
and stop all the marauders. 

6. There will be a provost commission in Danzig. The governor will supply ten small 
columns of 30 men each, to cross Pomerania to the Oder, stop all the stragglers and marauders 
and bring them before the provost commission. 

7. There will be a provost commission at Elbing, for the province of Marienwerder. 10 
French gendarmes and 50 Prussian cavalrymen will form the mobile column, which will be 
divided into five patrols or small columns, which will be constantly moving. 

8. There will be formed at Berlin such a provostal commission under the governor, who 
will organize as many small columns as it will be necessary to put the police between the Oder 
and the Elbe. 


TITLE I. 


9. It is expressly forbidden for the commanders of the various posts and passages on the 
Oder and on the Vistula, notably those of Warsaw, Plock, Thorn, Graudenz, Maricnwerder, 
Marienburg and Elbing, to let pass no isolated soldier. Isolated men, coming out of hospitals, 
convalescents, or absent from their corps' under any pretext whatsoever, will be retained by the 
commanders of Glogau, Kiistrin and Stettin, until these commanders have been able to gather 
100 well armed and well dressed to form a company which they will direct on the places of the 
Vistula. 


10. The commanders of the place on the Vistula will also retain’? 


530 


Page 531 


leave the isolated men alone until they have been able to gather 100 men whom they can train in 
company of march and to direct on Konigsberg. 

11. The commanders of Konigsberg, Wehlau, Insterburg, and Gumbinnen will prevent 
the movement of all isolated men, and will detain all men from intermediate hospitals, until they 
can form companies of 100 men, well armed, and state to join; they will then direct them to 
Kovno. 

12. Place commanders, hospital directors, commissioners of wars giving road-cards and 
storekeepers supplying food to isolated men shall be responsible for the non-execution of this 
measure. 

War commissioners, hospital directors and storekeepers will receive instructions from the 
Intendant General in this regard. 

13. The movable columns will stop all individuals in contravention of the present order, 
and direct them to the nearest place. 

14. The present order will be printed, read to the order of all the bodies, put in the order 
of all the places and posted on the doors of all the hospitals, all the bailiffs and all the town halls 
of the communes . 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18857. - ORDER FOR THE PASSAGE OF THE NIEMEN. 
Imperial Camp Nauaardyszki, June 23, 1812. 


The Prince of Eckmihl will be in charge of setting the bridges, of controlling the passage, 
and of passing the first with his army corps. General Eble will be under his command, with all 
the deck crew, the engineering parks, the workmen and sailors attached to him. 

At eight o'clock in the evening, the deck crew will set in motion, namely: Major-General 
Morand, at the head of three companies of voltigeurs of the 13th light infantry, commanded by a 
battalion commander of choice, 50 sappers and a captain of engineers. Each sapper will have his 
tool. Each outfielder will have a tool on his bag. In addition, packets of cartridges will be 
distributed, so that each outfielder or sapper has sixty cartridges at the time of passage. 

General Eble will divide his bridge into four parts, with the intention of throwing four 
bridges. One or two bridge companies will be sold at each bridge; it will be attached to them 
too 





53 


Page 532 


one or two companies of sappers, one or two companies of workmen, one or two companies of 
sailors, under the orders of a superior officer of pontonniers. Seamen and engineers, whatever 
their rank, will be subordinated to the pontoon officers. 

One of the bridges will be thrown opposite the hillock, to the left of the Jesia; the other 
two, between this one and the village of Poniemon, so that there will be at least 150 fathoms 
from one bridge to the other; at ten o'clock in the evening, the three decks having arrived in front 
of their site and in the greatest silence, the boats will be launched. The 300 men will be thrown to 
the other side; no fire will be fired unless absolutely necessary. The battalion commander will 
barricade his 300 men in the village by making cuts. 

General Pernety will at the same time place the 2nd Corps reserve batteries on the hill. 

The reserve battery. The 2nd corps will start at six o'clock to approach Poniemon and be 
carried on the right, in the place which will be recognized as the most favorable beyond the 
island. 

A company of the 4th Battalion of the 13th Light Infantry will be thrown into the island 
which is opposite Poniemon. 

The light battery and the foot battery of the Morand division will be placed, the battery 
on horseback, on the left of the Jesia, between the nipple and the mouth of the Jesia; the battery 
on foot, four pieces within range of the second bridge and four pieces on the right of the third 
bridge. 

The four mounted horse batteries of the corps will remain with their division. 

The four foot batteries will be placed in the village of Poniemon and distributed in four 
batteries, between the reserve battery and the last bridge. The battery of the 2nd division will be 
the first; that of the third will be the second; that of the 4th, the third 1 and that of the 5th will be 
the fourth. Each battery to pass with his division, it will be a pure movement to the left. 

The corps will take up arms at seven o'clock. 

We will make sure that the soldiers have eaten the soup. We will inspect the bags and 
cartridges, and we will ensure that they have with them for four days of food, without the 
luggage and caissons, nothing to pass. 

At eight o'clock the corps will set out and move between Alexota and Jesia on sixteen 
leagues, each regiment forming a line at the distance of half a battalion, the colonel and the 
regimental staff placed before the eagle of the Ist battalion; Brigadier General?** 





532 


Page 533 


forward, in the center of his brigade, the regimental pieces to the right of each line, and 
constantly harnessed, with all the caissons and ambulances of the regiments; the general of 
division behind the center of the 3rd line, with the commissaries of wars, administrations and 
ambulances of the division; the battery on horseback on the left of the division. 

There will be, from one division to another, the distance of half a battalion. The divisions 
will be in order of numbers. 

The brigade of light cavalry on two lines, each regiment forming a line, having the 
brigadier-general at its head, the horses saddled, but unbridled. 

All the officers of the staff of the army corps, between the Ist and the 2nd division, with 
the commissioners of wars, officers of the engineers, etc. 

The sapper companies will be at their division; they will be with the batteries on 
horseback, all the caissons of cartridges, the artillery park of the three divisions and the caissons 
of tools, so that at ten o'clock everything is thus in position. 

The 13th light infantry will be in battle beside the pontonniers, where is the general 
Morand, in order to be used, according to the circumstances, to reinforce the men on the right 
bank, or for any other service. 

At ten o'clock in the evening the three bridges must be thrown away. Morand's division 
will result in three columns, that is to say, by brigade, each brigade having at its head the 
regimental pieces. The divisional general will pass by the bridge of the center. The light artillery 
battery will pass by the left bridge, that is to say by the one situated before the mouth of the 
Jesia, at the tail of the brigade which passes on this bridge. The foot battery will go halfway to 
the right bridge and half to the center bridge. 

General Pajol will pass with the two elite companies of his brigade, one at the center 
bridge and the other at the right bridge. 

The past division will take a position which supports its right and left at the Niemen (1), 
its artillery in position, and will thus wait for the day. She will be able to carry 1,000 fathoms 
forward, always leaving the three companies of voltigeurs in the village and in the shelter. 

The cavalry will not make a patrol; it will only remain in the form of a grand guard, a 
company in the direction of Kovno, and the other in the direction of the rising river; everyone 
under arms and on horseback. 





1) This position is explained by the very pronounced curvature of the Niemen at the crossing point.?* 


533 


Page 534 


In this state of things, the Prince of Eckmihl will take my orders for the time when the 
2nd division will have to pass. The most severe orders will be given to prevent waste. General 
Saunier, commander of the gendarmerie of the Ist corps, will go with 50 gendarmes and a 
battalion, at daybreak, to Kovno. General Tarayre, appointed to be the commander of the place, a 
commissioner of wars, a storekeeper, a food inspector of the Ist corps, will also go there and take 
possession of the city. They will place posts to let no one enter the city, no soldiers, no officers, 
no generals, no general staff; they will summon the bourgmestres to the town hall and send me 
the bourgmestres and the inhabitants who will be able to give me news. 

General Morand will take care, as soon as he is over, to put a safeguard of ten men in the 
convent of St. Croix. 

Tomorrow, at five o'clock, the furnace builders of the 1st corps, with a company of 
sappers, will enter the city to build ovens. 

The fourth bridge will be placed on the heights of Alexota, behind; it will remain there in 
reserve with the pontooners, sappers and sailors. The commander of this fourth bridge, after 
having placed his pontoons which will be hitched up all night, will go to the general Eble, to the 
three bridges, so that, if one realized that there were not enough boats for the three bridges, I 
would have been aware of it, and that officer, perfectly informed of the locality, could go and 
take them himself without confusion or delay; he would have recognized for this purpose the 
path he should take. 

As soon as the town is occupied, the fourth bridge will be thrown in the ordinary passage 
of Alexola, and, as the river is only 50 toises, there will still remain pontoons to bridge the 
Viliya. This bridge will be hitched if the dimensions given to the river are checked. 

All the cavalry of the 1st and 2nd corps will assemble at seven o'clock, and place 
themselves on the height behind Alexota; it will be formed in as many lines as regiments, each 
division having its artillery, which will be put in battery, partly on the heights of Alexota, the 
parts will remain coupled. 

As soon as each division is formed, the men will dismount; they will settle at the bivouac; 
the horses will be saddled, but unbridled. 

Each general of division will bivouack at the head of his division; each Brigadier General 
at the head of his brigade?“ 





534 


Page 535 


The staff of the cavalry will settle in the house of Alexota 's doctor at ten o'clock in the 
evening without making any fire or noise. 

A second order, which the Prince of Eckmithl will receive in the evening, will inform him 
of the movements he may have to make after the passage. 

All the carriages of luggage, food, the reserve of the park, provisions, will be placed in a 
single place and at least 1,000 fathoms away from the river, not obstructing any road; he will 
pass only one car, that of Prince Eckmiihl and his caisson. 

ARTILLERY PARK. - Each piece will pass with its complete supply; the infantry 
caissons attached to the divisions will also pass. The reserve park will be located 1,000 yards 
from the shore. 

Tomorrow, at five o'clock in the morning, the director of the park will take the orders of 
the major general for the passage of his park. 

Tomorrow, also at five o'clock in the morning, the officer will take the Major General's 
orders on the number of cars and caissons the passage of which will be authorized; This can only 
take place after the corps has taken a stand and there will be news of the enemy. 

According to the minute. Deposit of the war. 


18858. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 24, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke of Reggio to throw his bridge over the Viliya, to have Legrand's 
division, his light cavalry, and his cuirassiers, to bring in the other two divisions, his reserve 
batteries, his park, so that it happens before nine o'clock in the morning. 

Give him the order to send a staff officer this night, with a detachment of sailors, the 
banks of the Niemen to the small river Naviaja, and to lower the boats. that we would find to 
bridge Alexota. Write the same thing to the genie, who will send a detachment of sailors and 
sappers to do the same operation on the left bank, 

Immediately send an officer to General Grandjean at Georgenburg to announce the 
passage, the movement of the Duke of Reggio on the right bank down the Niemcn, and to 
instruct the Duke of Taranto; so that, if he still has his division,” 


535 


Page 536 


he passes the Niemen, puts himself in correspondence, and joins with the Duke of Reggio; or, if 
he has gone to Tilsit to pass the Niemen, the officer will order the Duke of Taranto to set out to 
join the Duke of Reggio. 
Recommend to General Grandjean to send the boats he would have to build bridges here. 
Renew orders for food convoys to arrive by Niemen and Tilsit. 
NAPOLEON. 
According to original. Deposit of the war. 


18859. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno. June 24, 1812. 


My Cousin, a small cavalry depot will be formed at Kovno. 

Order the King of Naples to send his men and horses back to this little depot and appoint 
an officer to command him. Recommend that you lighten as much as you can. Be sure to attach a 
geographer engineer who sends a sketch of the country's situation twice a day. Ask this engineer 
for information on the Strava River, its width, depth and height. As soon as the cavalry has 
passed Jijmory, it is necessary that he sends strong brigades of light cavalry to light on the 
outlets of Olitta, because, if Iam well informed on all that happens on this road, he could be 
some good shots to do. It is also necessary that the King of Naples be certain that his light 
cavalry has defeated the whole country between the Viliya and the Niemen and that it is ensured 
1“ that the enemy has no bridge on the Viliya, 2nd There is neither infantry nor establishment. I 
desire that the geographer-engineer attached to the King not lose a moment in sending you a 
sketch of the whole course of the Viliya and that of the Niemen up to the elbow. Make known to 
the King that, until he finds himself in countries of great plain, he must not be too much 
encumbered with cavalry; that the cuirassiers must be spared; that there is no question but to 
repel the light troops of the enemy and to hear from him in the directions of Olitta and Vilna, and 
to put myself in a position to take the most suitable course of action. Recommend to the King of 
Naples to leave pickets from his vanguard as far as Kovno, so that, independently of the posts, it 
is possible to correspond by orderly officers; which is a sure way” : 





536 


Page 537 


and prompt. Recommend to the King of Naples to be sure that Skoruli was well recognized, as 
well as the whole Skorouli road at Jijmory. Send to the king that Marshal Ney, who is at 
Cormilof, receives the order to send strong acknowledgments to Skoroull. 

From the unsigned original. Deposit of the war. 


18860. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno; June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, order the Duke of Elchingen to go to Kormilof, where, according to the 
circumstances, I will order him to take the road to Jijmory; that if Skoruli had not yet been 
recognized by the brigade of light cavalry which passed yesterday, it will be convenient for him 
to recognize it, and to make sure that the enemy has no one left between that party of the Viliya 
and the Niemen. You will let him know that the Duke of Reggio passed the Viliya at Kovno; that 
the Prince of Eckmiihl is at Roumchichki; that he sends all the information he can obtain, and 
especially that his staff officers and geographers send with the reports a sketch of the country; 
because our maps are so defective that we can not find anything. Let him know what time he will 
be in Korrnilof. 

From the unsigned original. Deposit of the war. 


18861. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Reggio that I suppose that his light cavalry has already 
passed the Viliya at Kovno, that he must send a reconnaissance in the direction of Yanof; that 
three leagues from Kovno there is a junction of the road which goes to Chaty and from there to 
Poneveje and which reaches the Dvina. Poneveje is on the way from Chavli to Vilna. It is 
necessary to illuminate this roll until Jeimy. From Kovno the road goes to the village of Bivili, 
on the Neviaja river. Three leagues farther on is the post office which is in the village of Bobty, 
and six leagues further is Keidany. In Keidanya, Prince Wittgenstein was for a long time, with 
two divisions; it is convenient to know if there is still. It was there that he had to force the light 
cavalry, supported by the cuirassiers, and the Legrand division, which was to march in the 
direction of Bobty; than?’ 


537 


Page 538 


I suppose the river, at this height, is a small thing; that if it is necessary, however, a bridge will 
be made, and then the patrols may proceed to Georgenburg and make its meeting with the 
Grandjean division, that is to say with the 10th corps. From Bobty it will be easy to know if the 
Prince of Wittgenstein is at Keidany, or if he has returned to Rossieny, or whether he has 
marched on Vilkornir to join the Grand Army at Vilna, and finally what direction he has taken. 
My intention is, if he is still in Keidany, to walk to him to dislodge him. Your 2nd division will 
take a position halfway from Rovno to Bobtr, The 3rd will cross the bridge and take position on 
the right bank of the Viliya, will light on the Yanof road, by means of light troops, to the mouth 
of the river in the Niemen. It must be ascertained whether the enemy is in position on the right 
bank of the river. If the enemy were no longer in position on the banks of the river, patrols of 
light cavalry will be carried on Vilki, for the double purpose of having news of the troops which 
the enemy would have on the right bank of the Niemen. , and gather all the boats that we find 
and send them to Kovno. 

From unsigned original, War Repository. 


18862. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the King of Naples: 

I will send this evening an instruction to your Majesty on the manner in which the 
Emperor intends to make reconnaissance, so as not to compromise any part of his light cavalry. 
His Majesty hopes that the Prince of Eckmiihl will have rallied his army, and that you will have 
rallied your cavalry on your side. You must consult with the Prince of Eckmiihl to choose a good 
position, but which is no more advanced than Jijmory. Before taking a step forward, it is 
necessary that the chessboard is more unraveled. It is especially necessary that one should be 
entirely master of the whole left bank of the Viliya. The viceroy can not be on the line until two 
days. There can be no question now of walking on Vilna; to direct so great a movement, the 
Emperor will go by his person; besides, the left flank must be perfectly assured. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.*® 





538 


Page 539 


18863. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to General Grouchy, commander of the 3rd Cavalry Corps, to leave 
Dobile tomorrow at two o'clock in the morning, so as to reach the bridges at seven and eight 
o'clock, to pass them, and to instruct at the headquarters of his arrival. Order him to be preceded 
by an aide-de-camp who makes known exactly the moment of his arrival. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18864. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovuo, June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Taranto to walk with the greatest activity on Rossieny; that 
we have a bridge over the Viliya, and that the Duke of Reggio walks on Keidany, at the same 
time as we march on Vilna; let him send orders for food to come to Tilsit and be sent to us; that 
we need it badly. 

NAPOLEON 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18865. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Elchingen to seriously recognize Yanof; to send a good 
column of infantry and cavalry, and, if necessary, to support this column with all his army corps; 
to know all that is happening there as well as to Skoruli, and to make sure that the enemy has no 
bridge or establishment on the left bank of the Viliya; I very much want to have a positive report 
on this. If the enemy has any people on the side of Vanof, it would be necessary to know the 
number of the divisions which are there, and who commands them. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.” 





539 


Page 540 


18866. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


Cousin, let the Viceroy, whom I have passed to Kovuo, inform, that the Prince of 
Eckmihl is marching on Vilna and is already at Roumchichki; that, as his army corps is still only 
today at Kalwarya, I see that it can only be on the 27th or 28th in the case of crossing the river; 
that it is probable that I will send him a deck crew to pass to the village of Piloni. Let him tell me 
about the king of Westphalia. 

NAPOLEON. 


According to the original, Deposit of the war, 


18867. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


My Cousin, the battalion of the Danube will pass under the orders of the engineers, who 
will be responsible for building two raft bridges, one on the Niemen and the other on the Viliya 
opposite Kovno, and two stilt bridges in the same place. 

General Eblé will be in charge of building another bridge opposite Kovno, made up of 
boats from the country. For this purpose, detachments of pontooners and sailors of the 4th 
battalion will cross the two banks of the river which are currently free, down, and will trace all 
the boats they will find. The sailors of the Guard will be attached to the genie for the prompt 
execution of these two objects, order General Eble to consult with General Chasseloup to remove 
all the obstacles and lend each other mutual aid, so that I can as soon as possible to lift my four 
current bridges. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18868. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 25, 1812. 


The Major-General will order Captain Zakrzewski, attached to the staff of the Duke of 


Danzig, to leave at once with Mr. Heichel to purchase from the vicinity of Kovno the wheat, rye 
or flour that he show.**° 


540 


Page 541 


He will have a detachment of some men at Captain Zakrzewski's disposal to facilitate his 
means of finding wagons and protecting the arrival of these goods. 

The Headquarters Authorizing Officer shall forthwith dispatch a mandate of 3,500 francs 
in favor of Captain Zakrzewski, which sum shall be remitted to him to enable him to pay the 
grain or meal immediately after their departure from the owners. 

Captain Zakrzewski will have the grains and flours taken to the Kovno handling, where 
the quality and quantity will be ascertained, and he will report to the commissioner-in-charge of 
the headquarters of the employment the sum entrusted to him, producing in support of his 
account the receipts of the salesmen. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war, 


18869. - TO MAHECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist BODY OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN ROUMCHICHKI. 
Kovno, June 26, 1812, half-past three in the morning. 


Cousin, at the same moment, your aide-de-camp arrives with this student of the 
university. Your convoys must begin to arrive. Gather your troops and rest. Recognize a good 
position in case the enemy walks at you. Press by all means the return of General Friant and that 
of General Compans. Recall all your detachments, in order to assemble your army. It is 
necessary that you stand on guard against an operation that would arrive from Vilkomir on you. 
Besides, I send the Duke of Elchingen with his body to Skoruli, and the Duke of Reggio with his 
own to Yanof. The result of this operation will begin to clarify our position and to make the 
chessboard well known. Until this hour the King of Naples has perhaps been too vile. The army 
is only meeting, and we must not march against an entire army as we march against a beaten 
army. The Duke of Taranto crossed the Tilsit Bridge and walked on Rossieny. The division of 
General Grandjean, who had remained near Georgenburg, seized the city. 

I very much want your geographers to send a sketch with description, which will make 
the country known: whether there are woods, whether they are plains, hills, etc. I can hardly see 
that they are sending none of this. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original comm. From Madame the Marshal princess of Eckmiihl,*"! 


541 


Page 542 


18870. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 26, 1812. 


My cousin, order General Eble to begin at midday to raise one of the three boat decks, to 
load it on his bundles and to send him off tomorrow morning, to be returned in the day of the 
27th to the village of Piloni, where he will be bridged for the passage of the Army of Italy. He 
will send with this bridge a superior officer of pontooners who will take the orders of the officer 
commanding the artillery of the 4th corps for the pier of the bridge, which will take place as soon 
as the viceroy will order it and will be able to pass. You will recommend to General Eble to raise 
one of the three bridges, the most difficult passage of which is due to its surroundings. 

Write to the viceroy to let him know that tomorrow morning a boat bridge will leave to 
go to Piloni; that he sends his sailors and his sappers to throw the said bridge, on which he will 
pass with the 4th and the 6th corps and his cavalry. You will let him know that we are occupying 
Jijmory and that we are ten leagues from Vilna. 

NAPOLEON. 

P. S. Write to the viceroy that I would very much like his bridge to be thrown into the 
night of the 27th to the 28th, so that in the day of the 28th he would be in line. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18871. - TO PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 26, 1812. 


Cousin, you realize that there are 520 gendarmes in the army. This number is sufficient, 
but it is poorly distributed; we must leave only five in Berlin, leaving only five in Posen and 
Thorn; do not give it to the crews of the General Staff; I do not see why gendarmes would be 
used to keep luggage; any kind of troops can keep luggage. Give yours your guides, who are 
made for that; that will save you 1 officer and 22 men. Take away those of the King of Naples. 
Give him guides or take light horses: it will save 7. I leave those of the steward, because I guess 
they are not for his luggage, but to execute his orders. Take off the 5 of ”” 


542 


Page 543 


Secretary of State, the two of the Duke of Treviso and the Duke of Danzig, those of inspectors to 
the journals, those who are distributed to the various safeguards. So there are many gendarmes 
who become available again. Men are probably needed for the services they were responsible 
for; but take in the company of guides, which can be increased, also take in the cavalry. A 
gendarme is not a man on horseback; it is an agent who must be placed in every post, because 
this service is the most important, who must be in charge of the police on the rear of the army 
and must not be employed either in safeguard or for escorts, nor to keep any kind of baggage. I 
do not oppose the request of a squadron of cavalry until the arrival of the regiment of Baden, 
which you may employ in the service of the staff. All the army corps have too much 
gendarmerie; we use it, not for the police, but for the luggage escort, and that's not their job. 
Present me a draft regulation on this subject; it is not that I find that the service they are doing is 
not to be done, but I think this service should not be done by them. By making these reforms in 
the different corps, you can very well give each corps only 40 gendarmes. I shall have no 
objection to authorizing every general and every individual entitled to escort his baggage to raise 
a certain number of Poles for this service. Meanwhile, take cavalry: 2 or 300 men of cavalry 
more or less are nothing; 200 more gendarmes ensure the tranquility of the army and good order. 

NAPOLEON. 

From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18872. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 26, 1812. 


My Cousin, you will find attached the state of the convoys which left on the 25th for 
Tilsit. Send an officer to meet them. Write to General Bachelu at Georgenburg to protect the 
arrival of these convoys with all his means. It would be very precious to have these 7,000 
quintals of flour as soon as possible. Your officer will proceed from there to Tilsit to preside over 
this operation himself and to drive the convoys. It seems to me that the administrations want to 
unload these convoys at Tilsit; make it feel absurd, and let your officer take care of them 
without 





543 


Page 544 


delay; let him see the Prussian officers who will offer escorts for hauling. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original, Depot of War. 


18873. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN KOVNO. 
Kovno, June 26, 1812. 


Cousin, write to the Duke of Elchingen that our outposts are five leagues from Vilna, that 
Yevé is occupied by our troops, that it appears that General Baggovoute has gone from Vanof to 
Tchabiehki, where he has passed the Viliya, and that it is directed by Mousniki, Ghedroitsky, 
Koltyniany and Vidzy; that I do not know what Russian General Wittgenstein will have done, 
but that he was at Keidany on the 25th; that it appears that General Wittgenstein commands the 
Ist corps of the right, that General Baggovoute commands the 2nd, and General Toutchkof the 
3rd; that each of these corps appears to be two strong divisions of 20,000 men; that it is supposed 
that from Troki the bulk of the army goes to Vilna and from Vilna to Sventsiany; that Vanof is 
evacuated, as I suppose. I want him to start a vanguard today as soon as he can on Yeguzhin, and 
tomorrow morning he will walk so as to make a great day and get as close as possible, for 
example, to the village of Palki, in the direction of Vilna; that [am going to Jijmory tonight; that 
on the 27th we could enter Vilna. 

Write to the Duke of Remlio and the Duke of Taranto to communicate to them the same 
details on the right of the enemy and on our respective positions. Make known to the Duke of 
Reggio that it is necessary that he march tomorrow on Jeirny, to attack Wittgenstein, or at least 
to know the movement he makes and to clear the Niemen entirely. Write to the Duke of Taranto 
that the Duke of Reggio arrived today at Yanof and marches on Jeymy and Chaly; that he will 
attack Wittgenstein, unless he re-reads himself on Chavli, that I hope that the Duke of Taranto 
will go to Rossieny, leaving infantry posts on the left bank of the Niemen, to be perfectly sure of 
navigation. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.°“* 


544 


Page 545 


18874. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN VILNA. 
Vilna, June 29, 1812. 


Cousin, give orders to the Prince of Eckmihl that Friant's division be at the disposal of 
the King of Naples, and that the Gudin division should pass the Viliya bridge at nine o'clock in 
the morning, to be at the disposal of the King; that Morand's division leaves at three o'clock in 
the morning, and goes on to follow Mikhalichki; it will be illuminated by the Polish Light 
Cavalry Brigade, which, for this purpose, will join this route to Lovarichki, speaking of the 
position at which it is at one o'clock in the morning. The Compans division will also leave at 
three o'clock in the morning to go to Ochmiana; he will have with him the Pajol brigade, and a 
regiment of this division will meet on Soletchniki and be under the orders of General 
Bordesoulle. The prince of Eckmiihl will go to Mikhalichki himself and lead with him the 
division Valencia. Order General Nansouty to leave with the Saint-Germain division to support 
the Bruyere division and to follow the enemy on Korkojichki, taking the orders of the King of 
Naples, who will maneuver on the right bank, and concert with the Prince of Eckmiihl, who goes 
on Mikhalichki. 

Order the King of Naples to leave with the corps of Montbrun, the corps of Nansouty, the 
division Saint-Germain on the left bank, the divisions Eriant and Gudill, and to drive the enemy 
of Niementchine and to follow him in his retreat; to bind himself with the Duke of Elchingen, 
who is to be at Mieishagola this evening, and to direct him in the same direction on the enemy, 
charging him to send strong acknowledgments on Vilkomir to find out what exists there. 

Order the Duke of Elchingen to support the King of Naples and send an acknowledgment 
to Vilkomir; Let him know that the Duke of Reggio is going to Chaly to attack General 
Wittgenstein. 

At last you will order the King of Naples to have cavalry posts every three leagues, in 
order to correspond easily; you will give the same order to General Nansouty and to Prince 
Eckmihl. 

Recommend to the commanders of these three columns to correspond frequently with 
you, so that I can make arrangements to support them. It would also be necessary that, in each of 
these three directions, three companies of voltigeurs leave as soon as possible to support the 
cavalry. Unless we had a 


545 


Page 546 


positive knowledge of the progress of the enemy, and that we do not know what we are doing, 
we should not tire the troops too much. It is necessary to enlighten the three roads, not only by 
parties, but also by locals. 
NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18875. - TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA, 
COMMANDING THE 5th, 7th AND 8th CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN GRODNO. 
Vilna, June 29, 1812. 


Sire, the Emperor has charged me to inform your Majesty that we entered yesterday at 
Vilna, which the enemy has evacuated after having burned the bridge and immense stores. The 
Emperor assumes that your Majesty is at this moment in Grodno. Bagration's corps is in 
Ochmiaua. Your Majesty must therefore go with his army corps on Ochmiaua. Your Majesty 
will give our news to the Prince of Schwavzenberg. It results from intercepted couriers that there 
are no more troops in Volhynia. If this is true and there are no more forces on this side, Prince 
Schwarzenberg must maneuver in the direction of Brzesc to Slonime. 

By order of the Emperor, 
ALEXANDRE, Prince of Neuchearel and Wagram. 
From the Memoirs of King Jerome. 


18876. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN VILNA 
Vilna, June 30, 1812. 


Cousin, send orders to General Eble to go to Vilna with all his crews. He will raise the 
bridge which serves at this moment to the Viceroy, as soon as he has passed. I need to have a 
first detachment of the deck crew here, and then the whole thing. The service of Kovno will be 
done by a bridge on stilts on the Niemen, and by a raft bridge on the Viliya. In Vilna the service 
will be done by a bridge on stilts and by the rafts which are there. Give the order to the enginner 
to bring his park to Vilna, leaving at most two companies of sappers in Kovno and the necessary 
officers to the works. A company of sappers and the necessary officers will also be left in Vilna; 
the Danube battalion and the sailors of the Guard will go to Vilna. There will remain in Kovno 
an officer and fifty sailors of the 4th crew; give order that two companies” 


546 


Page 547 


of the Scheldt battalion go to Kovno. Thus the battalion of the Scheldt will have a company at 
Danzig, one at Koenigsberg, and two at Kovno. The harnessed tools and a company of workers 
will go to Vilna. I approve of General Chasseloup's idea, and grant to the engineers the battalion 
of the Danube and two companies of the battalion of the Scheldt. As for the 4th crew of sailors, 
he has his particular service; it will help engineering, pontoons and navigation. Ask the engineer 
general when the park sets off for Vilna. Order the general of artillery to bring two millions of 
cartridges and twenty thousand guns to Vilna; all this can come by water, the Niemen is entirely 
free. Recommend General Chasseloup to give me every eight days an exact report on the work of 
Kovno and Vilna. 

NAPOLEON. 
From the original. Deposit of the war. 


18877. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN VILNA, 
Vilna, June 30, 1812. 


Cousin, send to the Duke of Elchingen, that I thought he would be at Mieichagola 
yesterday; that it is indispensable that he should proceed without delay, and that he should make 
strong admissions on Vilkomir; that his order was to know what had happened to Mousniki; that 
I was hoping that by the 28th he would have made this reconnaissance, which would have given 
him information on the direction of Baggovoute; that Wittgenstein was in Vilkomir on the 27th; 
that he had left no one to Keidany; that the Duke of Reggio is much stronger than Wittgenstein; 
that it was only by a change of direction in the march of Baggovoute that the Duke of Reggio 
could have had to deal with a large part; that, consequently, I had ordered the Duke of Elchingen 
to ascertain the course of Baggovoute, and that it is with difficulty that I see that he has not done 
so; that I have just received news of the Duke of Reggio, who from Cat went there on Vilkomir, 
where he found the 5th and 14th divisions composing the corps of Wittgenstein, with Ouvarof 
and the Grand Duke Constantine, that all this had to make about 16,000 men; that he pushed 
them hard, took them off the bridge of Vilkornir, and made 500 prisoners; that this enemy corps 
retreats to Dinabourg; that, consequently, I order the King of Naples, who marches with three 
divisions of infantry and five of cavalry, to direct his course more openly to Sventsiany, and 
which I desire him to occupy without delay.>”” 


547 


Page 548 


Mieichagola and from there goes on Ghedroitsy, where he will communicate with the Duke of 
Reggio, and from where he can march on Vilkomir or Sventsiany, according to the 
circumstances; that it will be convenient that, as soon as Sventsiany is occupied by our troops, he 
will rise, in column, so as to be at the same height and in communication; that the Prince of 
Eckmiithl is on his side with two divisions against several enemy columns, encamped on the side 
of Ochmiana; that three divisions of Bagration were forced to march on Vilna, that they were 
already two marches the day after our entry into Vilna; let them go against them and pursue 
them; that many stores and officers are taken every day, that we are already at the 5th and 6th 
dispatch from Russia, and addressed to the general-in-chief who was here; that the loss of the 
stores they have already burned in the first, second and third line is estimated at 15 to 20 
millions; that, according to all the information taken, the enemy had on the right, from the 
marshes of Pinsk, four corps d'armee, each of two divisions, namely: Ist the corps of 
Wittgenstein, composed of the 5th and 14th divisions forming 12,000 men (the Duke of Reggio 
has more than 30,000); 2nd the corps of Baggovoure, composed of the 4th and 17th divisions, 
12,000 men; 3rd the corps of Chouvalof, composed of the Ist division of grenadiers and the 3rd 
division, 12,000 men, 4th finally of the corps of Toutchkof composed of the 7th and 11th 
divisions, 12,000 men, that these eight divisions do not make 48,000 men of the infantry, that the 
five sixths are recruits, that, if we add 10,000 men of the imperial guard, we see that all the 
infantry which was here in the north barely amount to 60,000 men; with the artillery and the 
cavalry, etc., this does not form an army of 80,000 men, which we know positively that the 
Russian divisions are composed, namely: the great of six regiments, the averages of five, some of 
four, but to calculate more than less they are all six, one regiment has only two battalions, one 
battalion only four, and therefore There are not 1,000 men per regiment. 

Reiterate the order to the Duke of Elchingen to communicate with the Duke of Reggio, 
and if he is opposite Baggovoute, who does not have 14,000 men, let him attack him vigorously. 

NAPOLEON. 


From the original. Deposit of the war.>** 


548 


Page 549 


18878. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN VILNA 
Vilna, June 30, 1812. 


Cousin, tell the Duke of Reagio that I am satisfied with the conduct he has held and the 
manner in which he has maneuvered. Let him know the direction taken by the King of Naples 
and that of the Duke of Elchingen, as well as the actual composition of the Russian army, as I put 
it in the dispatch which I have told you to send to the Duke of Elchingen. Tell him that General 
Wittgenstein had before him only 15,000 men, including the Knights-Guards; that I have the 
state of situation of this corps, which has been intercepted, and that independently all the 
elements that I have lead to this result. Recommend him not to tire his troops, to rally them, to 
try to organize the subsistence and to establish a good police. Tell him that I suppose that, by 
means of Corbineau's brigade, he has news of the Marshal Duke of Taranto, who on his side 
must give him his. Also let him know that the immense stores that the enemy had here were 
burned. Make known to the Duke of Taranto that he has no one left before him, Wittgenstein 
retiring on Dinabourg; ask him to occupy Poneueje, Chavli, and Telchi, and to spare the 
inhabitants of the country, who are for us. Tell him that it would not be impossible for him to 
receive the order to march on Mitau, since it appears that the whole hostile army is reading over 
Dinahonrg and Disna. He must put the place of Memel in very good condition. I look forward to 
seeing, from the plans and reports of the engineers, what it is that places and what can be 
expected. This point put in state, one could disembark there the crew of siege for the siege of 
Riga. Recommend to the Duke of Taranto to correspond with the Duke of Reggio by his outposts 
and also by Kovno. Tell him that we are still waiting impatiently for Tilsit's convoys. 

NAPOLEON. 

According to the original. Deposit of the war. 


18879. - TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGHAM, 
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE GREAT ARMY, AT KOVNO, AT VILNA. 
Vilna, June 30, 1812. 


Cousin, send to the Duke d'Elchingen an officer who goes to Souderva with all due 
diligence. He will inform him that Bruyere's division was last night at Niementchine; and that 
General Montbrun has*” 





549 


Page 550 


sent reconnaissance to correspond with him; that the Duke of Reggio having gone as far as Chat, 
it is very important for me to know that the enemy makes no movement of his right upon him; 
that it seems that General Wittgenstein is still at Keidany. Write to the King of Westphalia that I 
suppose that on the 29th he will have entered Grodno; that I desire him to go with the greatest 
activity after the enemy; that I am making divisions on the head of General Bagraiton, who, I 
suppose, will have taken the road to Minsk. 


NAPOLEON. 
According to the original. Deposit of war, 


18880. - TO MARCHECHAL DAVOUT, PRINCE OF ECKMUHL, 
COMMANDING THE Ist CORPS OF THE GREAT ARMY, IN VILNA 
Vilna, June 30, 1812, 


Cousin, I receive your letter, I send you a report from General Bordcsoulle; you will see 
there the march of the corps of Doktourof, who was marching on Ochmiana, inquire what is the 
direction taken by the Russians of Ochminna, in order to be able not only to direct General 
Morand, but also to be able to write it to General Nansouty, who will support on the right. I order 
the division Dessaix to leave at daybreak to support you, I will leave at daybreak as much 
cavalry as possible, If you have the cuirassiers of Valence, as I hope you can do good and 
beautiful things, 

NAPOLEON, 

From the original comm. by the Marechal Princess Eckmuhl, 


END OF THE TWENTY-THIRD VOLUME?” 





550 


TABLE ANALY TIQUE 
DU TOME XXIII. 





Nora.— Les dates iuserites entre parenthéses sont les dates des lettres de |’Empereur. 
Les chiffres placés a la fin des phrases indiquent les pages. 


Agovitte (Baron p’), général de brigade, 
Amraxtis (Duc pz). V. Juxor. 
Aoministaatiox, — (12 novembre 1811.) 
* Ordre au préfet de la Roér dorganiser 
edministrativement la ville de Wesel; il 
y sera Glabli une sous-préfecture et un 
tribunal de premiére imstance, 2. 
(15 novembre.) Enumération des ques- 
tices A traiter dans une série de con- 
ceils d'adiminisiration de lintérieur; 
importance que l'Empereur attache & 
ces délihérations, 17. — (22 nevein- 
bre.) Ohsevvation au sujet d'une con- 
tribution arbitreire imposée par Je maire 
de Cologne, 29. — (30 novembre.) 
Ordre de rewplacer Vingénieur des 
Bouches-du-Rhdve, 46. — (10 décem- 
bre.) Plaintes transmises & Montalivet 
sur l'ingénieur da Var, 68. — (30 dé- 
eambre.) Grdre au ministre de l'inté- 
rieur de changer le préfet et l'ingénieur 
dela Lozere, 133, —(25 janvier 1812.) 
La Catalegne est organiséc en quatre 
départements, 185. 

ADMINISTRATION DE LA GUERRE. 
(Administration de Ia). 

Avent (Baron) , général de brigade, & Ja 
Giande Armée, 107. : 

Aupint (Comte), ministre seerétaire d'Mtat 
du royazme d’lalie, en résidence a 
Paris, 143. 

Atrxaxone [¢', empereur de Russie, — 
(24 février 1812.) Napoléon déclare & 
ce sonversin que. ménie aprés les faits 
survenus depuis quinze mois, la paix 
est encore au pouvoir de la Russie, 
253. — (25 avril.) Nouvelles oxver- 
tures pacifiques de Napoleon & Alexan- 
dre, 388, V. livssis. 


V. Guraur 


A 


Acexanpre (Berthier), prince de Neuchatel 
et de Wagram, connétable, major gé- 
néral de l'armée d’Kspagne, puis de la 
Grande Armée.— (30 novembre 1811.) 
Ordre a Berthier de composer une relation 
compléte des campagnes d’Allemagne , 
de 1805 4 1809; importance que 
PEmpereur attache & cette suerte de 
journsl d’état-major, 42. — (i6 jan- 
vier 1812.) Le prince de Wagram 
prendra, au i¢" février, les fonctions 
de major général de la Grande Armée , 

60. U. Gnayox Aiwute. 

Aner. V. Baapanssquss (Heats). 

Avouins (Baron) , ministre de France & 
Copenhsgue, 204. VU. Sckpn. 

Avpviaxces umiramns. V. Santé (Service 
de). 

a général de brigade, 4 Ja 
Grande Armée, 108. 

Axcuerenne, — (6 novembre 1811.) Ordre 
ce libérer un certain nombre de pri- 
sonniers anglais qui se sont dislingués , 
a Givet, au rétablissement d'un pont 
velanl; ils seront mis sous la conduite 
@un ministre britannique, muni d'un 
cougé de trois mois; dispositions de 
Napoléon 4 faire des avances pacifiques 
a l'Angleterre, 6, — (25 novembre.) 
Proposition des Anglais d’échanger des 
seeres bruts contre des vins de France ; 
réilexions de I'Empereur & ce sujet; 
cendilions auxquelles ce mouvement 
commercial pourrait avoir liew, 36 a 
39. —— (17 avril 1812.) Ouvertures de 
paix faites & l’Angleterre par le duc de 
Bassano; bases d'un arrangemeul pour 
PKspagne, le Portugal, Naples et la 
Sieile, 371, V. Brocvs contiveytar , 
PRISONMIERS DE GLUERRE, 


552 


Axrnovanp (Comte np’), général de divi- 
sion, a la Grande Armée, 213. 
ApprovisronnemeNnts. — 1° Armée d’ Espa- 
gne. — (& décembre 1811.) Envoi en 
Espagne de frégates chargées d’appro- 
visionner Barcelone en riz et en farine, 
50. — (26 décembre.) Difficulté d'as- 
surer, au moyen du cabotage, J’'appro- 
visionnement de Barcelone; il devient 
nécessaire d’organiscr des convois régu- 
liers par Ja voie de terre, 111. — In- 
structions a ce sujet au ministre diree- 
teur de l'administration de la guerre; 
Jes transports pourraient se faire par le 
roulage et par les voitures des équipa- 
ges mililaires; — ressoucce offerte en 
grains et farines par la réserve de la 
ville de Cette, 112. — (29 décembre. ) 
Explications 4 Lacuée sur les mesures 
a prendre pour approvisionner Barce- 
lone et I'armée d’Espagne; convention 
a faire dans cette vue avec une maison 
de commerce ; calculs relatifs aux frais 
de cette opération; denrées espagnoles 
a introduire en France par le retour des 
convois chargés de munitions de bou- 
che et de guerre, 125. . 

2° Grande Armée. — (29 décembre 
1811.) Mesures 4 prendre pour I'ap- 
provisionnement de |’armée de Ja Vis- 
tule par Magdeburg, 128. — Provision 
d’eau-de-vie d'Italie 4 faire arriver sur 
Ja Vistule, par Dresde et Magdeburg , 
132.—(31 décembre.) Ordre pour! achat 
de vins et d'eaus-de-vie destinés a l’'appro- 
visionnement de !'armée sur la Vistule, 
146. — (3 janvier 1812.) Réserve de 
blé, riz et farine, 4 préparer a Danzig , 
154. — (13 janvier.) Instructions au 
comte de Cessac au sujet des approvi- 
sionnements a réunir & Danzig pour 
assurer la subsistance d'une armée de 
400,000 hommes , 165. — (7 mars. ) 
Ordre, de suspendre les achats d’eaux- 
de-vie commencés, 292. — (15 mars, ) 
L’administration de la guerre achétera 
2 millions de bouteilles de vin de Hon- 
grie, 312. — (16 mars.) Ordre con- 
cernant l’approvisionnement de Thorn, 
place désignée pour éire le quartier 
général de Davout au commencement 
d'avril , 317, — Instructions sur le ser- 
vice d’approvisionnement de la Grande 
Armée, 324, 325. — (18 avril.) Ré- 
serve de blé et de farine 4 réunir a 
Elbing, Thorn, Marienwerder et Ma- 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON I, 


rienburg, 374. — (17 mai.) Ody 
d'expédier des farines dans lon play 
voisines de la Vistule, 405.— (28 | 
Convois de subsistances envoyds \ 
suite de Ja Grande Armée, AS, = 
(1& juin.) Dispositions prescritue a 
vice-roi_ pour Tl'approvisionnemont 
Willenberg et des manutentions dy 
4° corps, 458. — Mémes ordies ai 
prince Eugine, 460..— Instructions 
a Jéréme-Napoléon au sujet dow réyey- 
ves alimentaires de Pultusk, Modlin ¢f 
Varsovie, 462. — (4 juin.) Indivaliny 
des points principaux doi J'arny 
lirera sa nourriture, précautions 
prendre pour que la farine no [ayy 
pas déefaut, 468. — (7 juin.) Néeom 
silé d’établir des magasins de faring § 
Marienburg et a Marienwerder, 474. 
(14 juin.) Organisation des réseryey 
d’approvisionnement de Ja Grand Ay 
mée sur la ligne de la Pregel, 4)(= 
(16 juin.) Ordre au major géndral dy 
faire verser dans les magasins d'Insley 
burg les farines réunies 4 Wehlau, S04. 


— Le général Durosnel est chargé dy ; 


veiller 4 Wehlau sur cette opération dy 
transport, 506. — (17 juin.) Manu 
tentions a construire dans les places dy 
Stallupeehnen et de Wirballen , 500, 
Un bataillon prussien sera employd, 4 
Wehlau, au chargement et au déchuy- 
gement des bateaux; — moyens iy 
mouture qu’offrent les bords do Iq 
Pregel, 507. — Mesures a prondie 
pour réunir du blé et alimenter lop 
moulins; fours @ établir devant Wil. 
kowyszki et Grodno, 508. — (18 juin.) 
Ordre de faire parlir de Tapiau pou 
Labiau Jes vivres destinés au promliy 
convoi du Niemen, 509. — (19 juin.) 
Emplacement a choisir pour les fours 
du prince d’'Eckmahl, 510. — Le due 
de Tarente tiendra un convoi de faring 
prét a filer sur le Niemen aussitdt quo 
Je passage sera effectué, 510. — Din» 
positions prises pour assurer I’'approvi« 
sionnement de la Garde 4 Gumbinnon ' 
511. — (20 juin.) Ordre a Davout de 
presser la construction de ses fours, 
513. — Nouvelles instructions 4 Mad- 
donald au sujet des convois de vivros h 
expédier a l'armée par le Niemen, 514), 
(25 juin.) Ordre d’acheter des grainy 
et des farines pour la manutention de 
Kovno, 540. — (26 juin.) Arrirds 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 553 


prochaine sur le Niemen de plusicurs 
convois de farine, 543. 

3° Approvisionnements & Uintérieur, 
V. Suwsisrances {Service des). 
Anaxcey (Baron vp’), général de brigade, 
48, 495. 
Anuie (Organisation générale). — (12 no- 
vembre 1811.) Instructions relatives a 
l'armement des cuirassiers et des lan- 
ciers, 4. — Observations sur le mau- 
vais esprit de quelques régiments ; 
ordre d'y épurer les cadres des officiers 
et sous-officiers , 9, — (30 novembre.) 
Explications touchant les drapeaux, ai- 
gles et fanions des régiments, couronnes 
Gor destinées aux régiments d’Auster- 
litz, 41. — Défense de metire dans 
les états-majors aucun officier libéré du 
service d’Autriche, 43. — (15 décem- 
bre.) Ordre relatif au colonel du 23¢ de 
chasseurs , 79. — (19 décembre.) En- 
quéte 4 faire touchant les ressources 
que la France peut fournir a la remonte 
de la cavalerie, 93. — Représentations 
a Clarke au sujet du livret de l’armée ; 
nécessité de redresser I’état de situation, 
94, — (25 décembre.) Ordre pour la 
formation de plusieurs brigades de ca- 


Aamte v'franme. V. 


niére armée, 139. — (15 mars 1812.) 
Envoi de trois régiments de marche a 
l'armée de Portugal , 312. 


Aawée v’Espacyz. —(15 décembre 1811.) 


Iustractions concernant l'artillerie et la 
cavalerie de l'armée d'Espagne , 79. — 
(23 décembre. ) Réduction de l'effectif 
d’artillerie de cette armée, 101. — 
(30 décembre. ) Rappel en France des 
régiments de la Vistule et des régiments 
polonais de l’armée d’Espagne ; réorga- 
nisation du 3° corps; création d'un 
corps d’armée de l'Ebre , sous les ordres 
de Reille; Dorsenne est remplacé par 
Caffarelli dans le commandement de 
Yarmée du Nord; mesures & prendre 
pour dissoudre le corps d'observation 
de réserve, 136 & 140. — (5 janvier 
1812.) Mouvement prescrit aux troupes 
polonaises et aux régiments de la Vistule 
faisant partie de l'armée d’Espagne, 158. 
— (8 février,) Formation ‘d’an nou- 
veau régiment espagnol, 212. — (15 
mars.) Renforts expédiés al’armée d’Es- 
pagne ; composition de lT'armée du 
Nord, 312. 

Conrs p’opservariox 
p'Irauie. 


valerie légére; généraux chargés de les Ante (Gnaxpe). V. Grape Anwie. 
commander , 104. — (26 décembre. ) Anrnesrations anprrrares., V. Pouce. 
Mesure relative a l'armement des cuiras- Annicut, duc de Padoue, 175. 

siers et des lanciers, 110. — (14 jan- Arritiuri, —(12 novembre 1811.) Or- 


vier 1812.) Instructions sur la confec- 
tion des étendards; cetle attribution , 
retirée 4 Lacuée , passera désormais au 
_ministére de la guerre, 174.—(16 jan- 
vier.) Ordre concernant les bataillons 
réfractaires des fles de Ré et de Belle- 
ile, 178. — (19 janvier.) Mouvement de 
troupes a contremander par le ministre 
de la guerre, 182. — (11 mars.) Em- 
ploi 4 faire des prisonniers espagnols 
dans l'armée; instructions relatives a 
leur incorporation, 304. —(14 mars.) 
L’Empereur se plaint de I'instruction 
insuffisante de quelques bataillons de 
Tile d’Elbe, 310. — (30 avril.) Ordre 
concernant l’enrélement des Espagnols 
dans l'armée , 388. — (8 mai.) Obser- 
vations touchant la rédaction des états 
des divisions mililaires , 399. 

Armée ps Porrucat. — (30 décembre 
181%) Ordre concernant un échange 
de troupes entre l'armée d'Espagne et 
Yarmée de Portugal; instruction pour 
lorganisalion de l'artillerie de cette der- 


dres concernant l’artillerie légére des 
cuirassiers, 6. — Instructions sur I'or- 
ganisation du pare de réserve, 4 Wesel ; 
Clarke dressera un état de récapitulation 
de lartillerie des différents corps d’ob- 
servation, 7. — (20 novembre. ) Ré- 
sultat des expériences de tir 4 longue 
portée faites 4 la Fére avec les mortiers 
a Ja Villantroys; ordre de continuer les 
essais, 25. — (23 novembre. ) Organi- 
sation du service de I'artillerie des corps 
d'observation ; intention de I'Empereur 
de conférer a Eblé le commandement 
en chef de cette artillerie; généraux de 
division et de brigade en sous-ordre, 29 
a 33. — (27 novembre. ) Ordre de 
composer un manuel d’artillerie de po- 
che; explications sur ce point , 39. — 
(4 décembre. ) Composition de I’équi- 
page d'artillerie des divers corps de la 
Grande Armée, 47. — Ordres a Clarke 
sur le méme sujet, 48. — (3 février 
1812.) Instructions sur !’organisation 
du frain d'artillerie de la Grande Armée, 


554% CORRESPONDANCE 


202. — (26 février,) Chacun des trois 
carps de cavalerie de la Grande Armée 
aura son pare; l'équipage de pont res- 
tera distinct de I'équipage de siége; 
ordré concernant Je personnel de I'artil- 
lerie, 254, — (29 février.) Envoi de 
munifions de poudre a la Grande Armée; 
mesures 4 prendre pour utiliser la pro- 
vision @ohus de Magdeburg, 263, — 
(8 mars.) Ordre a la Riboisiére de di- 
riger sur Magdeburg les chevaux des 
équipages de pont, qui devront tous 
avoir passé le Rhin Je 10 mars, 296. 
— (14 mors. ) La Riboisiére fera ses 
dispositions pour traxsporter devant les 
places de Riga et Dinahourg, par l'atta- 
que desquelles s'ouvrira Ja campagne, 
les éguipages de siége de Danzig ct de 
Magdeburg ; précautions prescriles pour 
que ce mouvement s’opére sans démas- 
quer le plan de Napoléon, 310. — 
(24 mars.) Ordre de transporter a 
Bromberg na équipege de siége , 333. 
— (26 rears.) Insivuctions relatives au 
raontement de lariiierie des Lev et 2° 
corps vers le Uistule, 343.—(S aveil.) 
L’'Eupereur réclame un livret de la si- 
tuation de Fartllerie, 359. —(8 mai.) 
Ordres concernant I'instructiou des com- 
pegaies d'artillorie des cohortes ; arulle- 
rie a distribucr sur les derriéres de la 
Grenade Arnée, 401, — (21 mai.) 
Envoi d'un équipage de pont de Denzig 
a Nbing, 414. — (27 mai.) Mesures 
& prendre pone Ie transport de deux 
équipages de pont a Elbing, 439. — 
(28 mai.) Augmentation du nombre des 
compagnies d'artillerie destinées a faire 
Te service sur les derriéres de la Grande 
Avarée ; places qu’elles doivent oceuper, 





DE NAPOLEON fer, 


447, — Nouveaux ordres yvolatif 
équipages de pont de la Grande 
449. — (23 juin.) Passayo du 
aa moyen de ponts jetés par le i¢ 
Ebié; ordre de 'Empereur i ee 
defilé du pare d'artillerio, 531 } 
— (30 juin.) Instractions cone 
fe mouvement sur Vilna den dqu 
ges de pont et du pare d'ertillorie 
Grande Armée, 546. — Ordrw de 
siruire un pont de pilotis sur le Nie 
et un pont de radeaux sur la Viliya, 6 
V. Give, Graxpe Anwix, Vinay 
Arruauy, capitaine, officier d'ordonnat 


de |'Empereur, 147: 8 
Aveusnaw, duc de Castiglione, marielul 


ceinmandent Ja réserve de la Gray 
Arvage, 455. V. Gnaxog Avaniv, 
Aurion: — (14 novembre 1811, ) Nie 
poléon se déclare « assuré del’ Aatriches 
15. —(19 décembre, ) Déraarche aoe 
a fuive & Vienne, en vue d'un achat 
chevana en Autriche, 93. — (28 ia 





1412.) L'Empereur informe le viede 


pi de som freité @allisnea offensive ob 

isfensive avee TAntriche , 347, om 

(26 imai.) Prochsine mise en morehe 
du Te? corps dsrinée antrichion, OMe 
piandé par Te prince de Schwarzenberg, 
433, — (10 inin.) Les Autrichiens 
sov.t charges Qe couvrir Varsovie ot la 
rive gauche do la Vietule, 480, <= 
( 20 juin, ) Schwarzenherg se converlora 
avee Reynier pour suivre ennemi par 
Bialystok el Braese, sans cesser de cous 
vrir Je duché de Varsovie, 518. — 
Envoi de fonds & Schwarzenberg, 518, 
V. Guanpe Anuée. 

Avicx (Baron), général de brigade, 58, 
260, 261, 





B 


Bacnunu (Baron), général de brigade , 
543. 

Haccovours , général russe, 9¢9, o¥9. 

Bacrarion (Prince px), général co aman- 
dant Vaile gauche des Russes, 484, 
496, 498, 526, 544, 547. Ve Cuavne 
Anis, Russie, 

Banex (Capitulation de), —.(12 février 
1812.) tnstructions & Cambacérés au 
sujst da procés de Bailen; renvoi de 
Faffsire & un conseil d'enquéte, 221. 
— (37 févriev.) Ordre & Daru de faire 
un vapport sur les resullats de la com- 


mission d’enquéte; fEmpereur prendva 
un décret définitif sur cette affaire, 257, 

Bauer ve ra Torr , général de division, 9, 

Banuy vi Moxrntsx (Comte), généval de 
brigade , A l'armée d' Espagne, 22. 

Banuusteros, chef de troupes insurrec- 
tionnelles en Espagne, 21. 

Bates (Baron) , général de brigade, 48, 

Banpinesgvrs (Mtats). — (9 janvior 1812.) 
Mission confiée au capitaine Meynard & 
Alger, 162. 

Barvirn, bibliothécaire de I'Empereur. — 
(19 décembre 1811.) Ordre a Bar- 

















-_- 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


bier de faire remettre a l'Empereur des 
ouvrages topographiques et militaires 
concernant la Russie et la Pologne, 95. 
— (7 janvier 1812.) Renseignements 
de méme nature demandés a Barbier, 
162. — (26 février. ) Changements a 
opérer dans la hibliothéque de I’Empe- 
reur; Napoléon désirera:t avoir une 
Histoire de France de Velly, 255. — 
(7 mai.) Ouvrages divers sur la Russie 
demandés 4 Berbier, 398. 

Bannov, général de division, 346 , 438. 

Barri, capitaine de vaisseau, 276 , 297. 

Bassaxo (Duc pz). V. Maner. 

Baste (Comte), contre-amiral, 309, 426, 
450, 523. 

Barain.oys p'kuitr. —(6 décembre 1811.) 
Batailfons dits d'élite a fournir, pour !a 
défense de Ja fronti¢re contre les handes 
espaqnoles, par les départements limi- 
trophes des Pyrénées, 54. 

Baupw (Baron), contre-amiral, 206. 

Bavanorsizs (Troupes). V. Granpe Aruie. 

Bavikun. — (8 février 1812.) Ordre au 
viee-roi G'aviser Je roi de Baviére du 
passege prochain du corps d’observatio: 
dLialie par fe Tyrol; le mont Brenzer 
devra éfre debarrassé des neiges qui 
Vobstruent ; 212. . 

“Bearmoyr pe Canviinn (Baron), général 
de brigade, a la réserve de cavelerie, 
105, 353. 

Beaurens - Beacpnt, ingénieur hydrogra- 
phe en chef de la marine, 187, 193. 

Bettranp (Conite), général de division, A 
la Gravde Armée, 108, 249, 307, 
316, 230, 335. 

Benueny (ue pe). V. Ureron Penary. 

Bencxazia (Bsron), général de brigade, a 
la Grande Armée, 105. 

Bracox (Comte) , conseiller d'etat, direc- 
teur général de J'administration des fo- 
réls, 71. 

Renrninn. V. Avexaxoner. 

Bertier (César), comte, général de di- 
vision, 394. 

Berrraxy (Comte), général de division, 
422, 438, 

Bessitres, duc d'Istrie, maréchal comman- 
dant la Garde impériale, 83, 188,214, 
241, 488, 524, 526. V. Garve mrk- 
RIALEL 

Bessiiines baron) , général de brigade, a 
la Grande Armée, 40,105, 177. 

Beuruaxy (Baron), général de brigade, 
103. 






555 


Brenratsance rustigre. — (6 février 1812.) 
Ordre de faire ua versement de fonds & 
la Société de charité materne!l:e, 206. 
— (8 février,) Secours en subsistances a 
distribuer aux pauvres de Paris et du dé- 
partement dela Seine, 209. —(11] mars. ) 
Note diclée en conseil des miinistres : 
il seva établi dans ‘tontes Jes villes des 
fourneaux pour les soupes a la Rusnfort ; 
Je conseil recherchera les moyens de faire 
un fonds de dix millions afin de secou- 
rir Jes indigents qui souffrent de la 
hausse du blé: on déterminera ensuite 
comment ce secours devra étre réparti 
entre les départements, 302. V. Sun- 
sistayors (Service des). 

Ricxox (Baron), résident de France 4 
Varsovie. — (20 décembre 1811.) In- 
tention de !Empereur d'altacher Biqnon, 
cn cas de guerre, & son quartier géené-: 
rel; fonctions qui lui seraien! décoiues ; 
i! s’ocenpera sans retard d’organiser, a 
Vaide dagents polonais, un vasie ré- 
scau de surveillance autour de l'armée 
ennemie et dans Jes diverses places de 
la Russie ; dépense mensuelle effectéa a 
ce service, 95. — (31 décembre.) 
Ordre a Bignon d’aceélérer les srme- 
ments dans Je Grand-Puché, ct d'y 
préparer des ressources cn subsistances 
el chevaux; diserétion qu’i! doit appor- 
fer dans Vaccomplissement ¢e cette 
tache, 144. — (28 mai 1872.) Con- 
cours que le baron Bignon devra préter 
a Vambassadeur de France 4 Varsovie, 
chargé d’étadier ef de préparcr les élé- 
iments d'une reconstitution éventnelle de 
la Pologne, 446. V. Vansovin ( Grand- 
duché de). 

Bicor ve Pont-Bopww (Comte), colonel , 
directeur du pare de la réserve de cava- 
lerie de la Grande Armée, 32. 

Bicor pg Pritamenco (Comte), ministre 
des culfes, 500. V. Crenct sécunren. 

Bracke, général espagnol, 21. 

Reocrs CONTINENTAL. (29 novembre 
1811.) Progrés de la contrebande an-~ 
glaise dans Je Holstein; des plaintes 
seront adressées , & ce sujet, au ministre 
de Danemark, 23. — Observations aa 
directeur général des douanes sur les 
abus qui se commetlent dans l’octroi 
des licences; déclaration de nullité de 
tous les permis délivrés par la police et 
non revélus de la signature de I'Empe- 
reur, 28. — (25 novembre.) Notes 





556 


dictées en conseil du commerce et des 
manufactures : désignation des denrées 
qui pourront étre exportées au moyen 
de licences ; en échange des vins, eaux- 
de-vie , graines de tréfle, on recevrait 
les sucres bruts, cuirs et potasses, dans 
un certain nombre de ports frangais ; 
autres réglements a faire concernant 
lentrée des cotons motrils et le mouve- 
ment des hateaux de péche, 36, 39. — 
(13 janvier 1312.) Note sur le blocus 
continental dictée en conseil du com- 
merce et des manufactures : résullat du 
systéme de prohibition; prix du sucre 
en France et dans les pays.qui observent 
les dispositifs des décrets de Berlin et 
de Milan; avantages qu’il y aurait a faire 
entrer dans |'Empive une certaine quan- 
tité de denrées coloniales en échange 
d'une exportation de produits frangais ; 
contre-coup probable de cette mesure en 
Angleterre; il n'y aurait plus désormais 
que deux espéces de licences ; modifi- 
cations et développements dont le nou- 
veau systéme pirait susceptible; de 
quelies facons différentes il devrait étre 
appliqué en Italie, dans la Confédéra- 
tion du Rhin, 4 Trieste, 4 Danzig, dans 
les villes anséatiques et en Prusse, 167. 
— (19 janvier.) Ordre pour une saisie 
de marchandises coloniales dans la Po- 
méranie suédoise, 182.—(28 janvier.) 
Dispositions prescrifes 4 Davout pour la 
fermeture des passages entre Ja Suéde 
et le continent, 194.— (11 mars. ) 
Observation au vice-roi sur une intro- 
duction illégale de marchandises colo- 
niales en Italie, 302. — (6 avril. ) 
Ordre de fermer les yeux sur l'entrée 
en Corse du sucre et du café, 359. 

Boxer (Comte), général de division, a 
Yarmée d’Espagne, 231, 245. 


Cavorace. — (20 novembre 1811.) Me- 
sure a prendre pour assurer la sécurité 
du cabotage sur les cétes de Bretagne , 
25. 

Cacuin, directeur général des travaux de 
Cherbourg, 342. 

Cavont (Duc pz). V. Caineacny. 

Cavvareutr (Comte pe) , général de divi- 
sion, a l'armée d'Espagne, 139, 140, 
312, 356. 

Cimas, général de brigade, 69, 78. 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie, 


4 la Grande Armée, 104, 158, DAN. 
550. 

Boncuusx (Camille), prince, gouverneiy 
général des départements au dulh des 
Alpes, 209, 417, 421, : 

Bousers (Baronne px), sous-qouvernanle 
de la Maison des enfants do ranoe, 
46. 

Bouzoaye (Flottille de). V. Maninn, 

Bouncer (Comte), général do division, 
206, 320, 337. 


Bonvgsouttx (Baron), général de hy rr 


Bourceat (Baron), général do brigaie, 


Bourwont, adjudant commandant, 148, 
358. 

Bounntexne (Fanvelet ox), chargé d'aflalvos 
de France 4 Hambourg. — (25 déoeiie 
bre 1811.) Il est suspecté par I'Kimpte 
reur d’entretenir des intrigues 4 Lone 
dres; rapport faire, 4 ce sujet, par le 


ministre des relations extérieures, 104, * 


Bouver, capitaine de vaisseau, 50, 

Bover ve Ravevat, général de brigade, 
336. 

Bricue (Baron), général de brigade, 159, 

Brovarv (Baron), général de brigade , 
260. 

Broxo, général de brigade, a Ja Grande 
Armée, 105. 

Bauyiee (Baron vx), général de division 4 
Ja réserve de cavalerie, 61, 164, 18%, 
218, 243, 278, 287, 317, 333, 414, 
487, 488, 545, 549. 

Bupcur, — (24 novembre 1811.) None 
valeurs 4 éliminer du budget de 1819; 
il sera créé, pour les couvrir, une ross 
source extraordin&ire , 33. 

Buncke (Baron), général de brigade, 4 
Varmée d'Espagne, 21. 

Bunrag (Baron), général de brigade, 103, 
104, 153. 


C 


Campacénts (Prince) , archichancelier, 221, 

Campniet , colonel, 242. 

Cavaux, — (27 janvier 1812.) Observa+ 
tions sur un projet de communication 
intérieure de la Baltique au Rhin : 
commission 4 nommer pour examiner 
le travail de Vingénieur Beautems« 
Beaupré, 186, 187. 

Caxisy (Baron pz), capitaine, écuyer de 
I'Empereur , 46. 

Cirveee Metvitt, capitaine hollandais, 51 


4 


) 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


Canna Saint-Cyr (Baron) , général de divi- 
sion, 218, 243. 

Castex (Baron) , général de brigade, 60, 
104, 153, 249, 330, 335, 339. 

Casticuione (Due pe). V. Avczreav. 

Castieceace (Lord), secrétaire d’'Etat pour 
les affaires élrangéres, a Londres, 371, 

Cavtaixcourt, duc de Vicence, général de 
division, grand écuyer , 101. 

Cavateate. V. Anais (organisation géné- 
rale), Réserve pe cavanen. 

Cxssac (Comte pz). V. Lacuér, 

Cuapert, général de brigade, aide de 
camp du roi Jéréme, 278. 

Cuasnoi-Crovzo., intendant en Illyrie , 
120. 

Cuameaniac, général de division, 386. 

Cuampacny (Nompiae bs), duc de Cadore , 
intendant général de Ja couronne, — 
(31 décembre 1811.) Ordre relatif a 
un présent de porcelaines destiné a 
I'Impératrice, 147, — (20 avril 1812.) 
L'Empereur réclame de Champagny le 
compte de ce qu’ont produit la démoli- 
tion des maisons du Louvre et du Car- 
rousel et la vente des terrains de la rue 
de Rivoli et des Capucines, 377. 

Cuartat (Comte), membre de l'Institut. 
— (30 décembre 1811.) Il est chargé 
de faire un mémoire sur Ja fabrication 
du sucre de betterave, 133. 

Cuarconyet (Baron), général de brigade , 
48 


Cuarrentigr (Comte) , général de division, 
461. 

Cuassrzovy-Launar (Comte px) , général de 
division, 4 la Grande Armée , 254, 
255, 540, 547. 

Cuasseurs pes moxracnes. — (6 décembre 
181].) Nécessité de consercer , pour 
défendre la frontiére pyrénéenne contre 
les incursions des bandes espagnoles , 
les bataillons de chasseurs des monta- 
gnes, 55. — (29 février 1812.) Ordre 
dans le méme sens au ministre de la 
guerre, 262. 

Cuasre (Baron) , général de brigade, 188. 

Ctapantps (Comte De), général de divi- 
sion, 296, 354, 396, 457, 478, 513, 
516, 524, 

Ciarke, comte d'Hunebourg, duc de Feltre, 
ministre de la guerre. V. Anuéz (orga- 
nisation générale) et la liste des lettres 
adressées & Clarke, p. 387. 

Crereé avieuurer, — (3 mars 1812.) Ordre 
au ministre des culles concernant des 


557 


maisons de seurs de l'ordre de la Cha- 
rilé; disposition disciplinaire prescrite 
contre ces établissements, 276, 

Curred sticutier. — (22 novembre 1811.) 
Mesure a. prendre pour éloigner les Sul- 
piciens de tous les séminaires, 29, 
(16 juin 1812.) Obligation, pour les 
prétres qui veulent rentrer dans leurs 
bénéfices, de préter le serment ecclé- 
siaslique prescrit par le concordat; dis- 
tinction a élablir entre ce serment et 
celui d'obéissance et de fdélité quils 
doivent aussi en leur qualité de ci- 
toyens, 500. 

Cotert (Baron) , 
188, 215, 

Cottin, comte de Sussy, ministre des 
manufactures et du commerce. 
(10 janvier 1812.) En récompense de 
ses services, Collin est nommé ministre 
des manufactures et du commerce ; at- 
tributions qui lui seront dévolues, 163. 

Cotontes EspacNotes, — (25 novembre 
1811.) Croisitres 4 expédier sur les 
cétes d’Amérique pour y appuyer les 
colonies insurgées, 35. 

Couontes HOLLANDAIsEs. — (25 novembre 
1811.) Préparatifs d'expéditions pour 
Batavia, 35. — (5 décembre. ) Ordre 
de faire partir de Brest et de Nantes 
divers bdtiments pour Java, 50. 

Coxnence. — (20 novembre 1811.) An- 
nulation des licences délivrées par la 
police ; l'exportation par les smogleurs 
est interdite, 28. — (25 novembre, ) 
Notes dictées en*conseil du commerce : 
discussion d'un systéme de déroga- 
tion partielle au blocus; denrées dont 
lexportation pourra étre autorisée en 
échange de produits anglais tels que 
sucres et laines ; changements 4 intro- 
duire dans la réglementation du sys- 
téme de péche, 36, 39. — (29 dé- 
cembre.) Indication des denrées colo- 
niales qui pourront étre importées en 
France par le retour des convois char- 
gés d’approvisionner |’armée d'Espagne 
et spécialement Barcelone; conditions 
dans lesquelles cet échange devra se 
faire, 125, 126. — (30 décembre. ) 
Nécessité de multiplier les fabriques 
de sucre de betterave, afin d’encoura~ 
ger Ja culture de cette plante en ulili- 
sant toute la récolte annuelle; impuis- 
sance du commerce & se livrer a cette 
fabrication; exposé des raisons écono 


général de brigade, 


558 


miques ct politiques qui obligent le 
gouvernement a se charger seul de cette 
opération; eapercu des dépenses a faire 
dans cette vue, 133, 135. — (6 jan- 
vier 1812.) Conditions auxquelles la 
patente sera donnée aux fabricants de 
sucre de belterave; garanties et imusu- 
nilés que le gouvernement leur accor- 
dera; bénéfices & réasliser; fabriqnes- 
écoles 4 élablir sur divers points de la 
France, 158, — (10 janvier.) Créa- 
tion d'un ministére des manufactures ct 
du commerce; affaires qui ressortiront 
4 ce département, 163. — (13 jan- 
vier.) Observations relatives aux résul- 
tats du syst¢me prohibitif; mesures a 
prendre pour faire entrer dans |’Empire 
cerlaines denrées coloniales , telles que 
sucre, café, indigo et thé, en échange 
de produits naturels et manufacturés , 
dont l'exportation se ferait moyennant 
deux sortes de licences; impulsion nou- 
velle que le commerce et la fabrication 
de France recevraient de ces opérations , 
167. — (25 avril.) Ordre de lever les 
entraves qui génent Ja péche sur les 
edtes de Krance el de Hollande, 385. 
V. Biocus continenTaL. 

Comeaxs (Comte), général de division , 
34, 541, 545. 

Coxrévération pu Ruin. — (2 décembre 
1811.) Jugement de Napoléon sur l'état 
des esprits en Allemagne; du caractire 
du peuple allemand comparé 4 celui du 
peuple espagnol ; inanité des bruits alar- 
mants qu'on fuit circuler; satisfaction 
des Hessois; observations de !'Empe- 
reur au sujet d'un pamphlet de Kotze- 
bue et de Jibelles répandus par les An- 
glais, 44 a 46. — (16 décembre.) Les 
princes de la Confédéraltion seront in- 
vilés a tenir préts leurs contingents; 
instructions sur ce sujet au ministre 
des affaires étrangéres, 82. — (30 dé- 
cembre.) L'Empereur presse la mise sur 
pied des contingents de la Confédéra- 
tion, 132. — (13 janvier 1812.) De- 
mande de soldats a faire aux cours de 
Hesse - Darmstadt, Wurtemberg, Ba- 
viere et Saxe, 166. — (28 janvier.) 
Ordres relatifs 4 j’organisation de plu- 
sieurs contingents de la Confédération 
destinés 4 composer une division sous 
le commandement du général Daendels, 
192. — (9 février.) Composition de la 
Ire brigade de !a division princiére; 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie. 


elle sera employée a défendre lou cilyy 
anséatiques; destination preserile ais 
brigades de Berg, de Hesse-avmatudl, 
de Bade, de Mecklenburg; gdndraus 
chargés des commandements, 216, 
(21 février.) Marche des contingonis 
ellemands dans Je mouvement général 
du corps d’observation de I'Elbo , @44, 
— (3 mars.) Nouvelles demandes de 
troupes et de munitions de guerre [ailoe 
aux princes de la Confédération , 874; 
les brigades de Hesse-Darmstadlt, dv 
Berg et de Bade, commandées par 
Daendels ,- formeront la 26¢ division de 
la Grande Armée, 277. — (29 mars.) 
Instructions @ lransmettre aux ministres 
de France prés les princes de la Confi« 
dération; I’Empereur désire quo cos 
souverains concertent un accord do 
forces pour se secourir mutuellemont 
en cas de besoin, 347. — (20 juin,) 
Pillages commis en Polegne par la bri 
gade wartembergeoise; suppression do 
celte brigade, mise par I'Nmpereur & 
Yordre de l’armée, « c’est-a-dire de 
VEurope », 519. V. Gnawve Anuin, 


Coxrkotnation uetvériqus. — (12 novem« 


bre 1811.) Observations sur |'effectil’ 
insuffisant des régiments suisses; fixa« 
tion da contingent annuel que les can= 
tons doivent fournir a Napoléon, 5, — 
(29 mars 1812.) Démarches prescrites 
au ministre de France en Suisse pour 
obtenir de ce pays qu'il se charge de 
contenir, au besoin, le I'yrol et le Vo- 
rarlberg, pendant la prochaine campa~ 
gne de Napoléon, 347. 


Coxscriptiox. — (16 décembre 1811.) 


Prochaine levée de la conscription de 
1812, 82. — (18 décembre.) Emploi 
a faire de ces recrues pour la défense 
de la Hollande, de Hambourg et des 
edtes de l'Ouest; principes généraux 
observer dans la répartition des con- 
scrits, 105. — Note dictée en conseil 
des ministres : principes qui doivent 
présider 4 l'organisation de |'armée de 
mer; est passible de la conscription tout 
marin qui ne se trouve pas déja, en 
vertu de l'inscription , a bord d'un vais- 
seau; explication de I'Kmpereur tou- 
chant ce systéme; utilité d'établir l'in- 
scription maritime en Hollande, 91. — 
(19 décembre.) Ordre de présenter au 
Conseil d’Kiat le décret relatif & la levée 
de 1812. 94. — (24 janvier 1812.) 








TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 559 


Intention de !Empereur de faire pro- 
chainement, sous le titre de premier 
ban de Ja’ garde nationale, une levée 
répartie sur les conscriplions de 1809 
& 1812; ces soldats demenreraient a 
lintérieur , préposés a la garde du ter- 
ritoire, 185. 


de bataillons appelés 4 faire partie du 
corps de Davout, 118. — (30 décem- 
bre.) Ordre a Davout de faire tous les 
achals de chevaux nécessaires pour Ia 
remonte de son armée, 140. — Dispo- 
sitions prises pour compléter l’organi- 
sation du corps d’observation de I'Elbe : 


Coxsraxtin PacLowrtz , 
Russie, 547. 

Corz:xzau (Baron), général de brigade, 
103, 104, 153, 249, 315, 549. 

Conrou (ile de), dans la mer lonienne. — 


grand-due de infanterie, garde impérisle, cavalerie 
légére, réserve de la cavalerie, équi- 
page de siéye, artillerie, 141. — 
(2 janvier 1812.) Le corps d'ebserva- 
tion de |'Elbe, dédoublé, formera deux 


Corrs 


(26 décembre 1811.) Evaluation de la 
quanlité d’approvisicnnements en ré- 
serve 4 Corfou; nouvelles expéditions 
destinées a cette fle; mesures 4 prendre 
pour en assurer Je ravitaillement pen- 
dant deux ans, 113. — (29 décembre. } 
Nécessilé de n’envoyer A Corfou que 
des convois bien escortés qui puissent 
déficr les croisi¢res anglaises, 131, 
pieLomaTigcr. V. Dirtomariouz 
(Corps. ) 

Cours p'owservarioy pg t' Exes (1°* corps. )— 
(12 novembre 1811.) Instructions pour 
Vorganisation de Vartillerie de ce corps . 
7, 8 — (23 novembre.) Répartition 
du matériel entre les places de Minden, 
Munster et Wesel; généraux chargés 
des commandements de ceite artillerie , 
31, 32. — (9 décembre.) Renfort de 
cavalerie expédié au corps de Davout , 
60. — (16 décembre.) Adjonction d'ua 
équipage de matelots de Ja floilille an 
corps d’observation de "Elbe, 85. — 


des quatre corps de la Grande Armée , 
151..— (6 janvier.) Ordre relatif a 
l’armement des cuirassiers ef des che- 
vau-légers du corps de Davont, 160. — 
(10 janvier.) Composition du 1¢" corps 
Wobservation de I'Klbe, 163.—(15 jan- 
vier,) Reéflexions tovchant les états de 
situation du corps d'observation de 
PElbe, 177, — (19 janvier.) Direc- 
tions prescriles aux différentes divisions 
de Davout, 182. — (21 février.) Ordre 
au prince d’Eckmih! de commencer !¢ 
mouvement de son Corps sur Steltin; 
positions qu'il devra oceuper da 5 au 
10 mars; forces qu'il aura sous ses 
ordres, 242. — (24 février.) Pres- 
eriplions relatives au dépot de réforme 
4 organiser 4 Stettin; précaution a 
prendre pour la réforme des chevaux , 
252. — (3 mars.) A dater d’avril , le 
ler corps d'observation de I'Kibe pren- 
dra Je nom de 1? corps de la Grane 
Armée, 277, V. Granve Anus. 


(20 décembre.) Observations sur l'état Conps n'onsenvation pg t’Eube (2° corps). 


sanitaire de ce corps; nécessité d’en 
compléter promptemeut l'effectif, 96. 
— Ordre 4 Davout au sujet de l'état de 
situation de son armée au i** décem~- 
bre, 97. — (25 décembre.) Instruc- 
tions concernant Ja formation de cing 
brigades de cavalerie Iégére destinées i 
faire partie du corps d’observation de 
T'Eibe, 105. — Organisation des cing 
divisions de cuirassiers de !'armée de 
Davout; généraux chargés de les com- 
mander; disposilions relalives au ser- 
vice des lanciers et des chevau-légers 
pendant Ja prochaine campagne, 105, 
106. — Changemenis dans la compo- 
sition de la 6¢ division du corps d’ob- 
servation de I'Elbe; elle se rénnira a 
Osnabriick ; ordres concernant la for- 
mation des 8& et 9¢ divisions, 107. 
108. — (27 décembre.) Enumération 


— (10 janvier 1812.) Composition du 
2° corps d’observation de I'Elbe; il sera 
commandé par le due de Reggio, 163. 
— (22 février.) Ordre 4 Oadinot de 
porter son quartier général & Magde- 
burg, 249, — (3 mars.) A dater du 
ler avril, le 2¢ corps d’observation de 
YElbe prendra le nom de 2° corps 
de la Grande Armée, 277. V. Graxvt 
Armée. 


Conrs v’onsenvarion pg t'Octan (3° corps 


de la Grande Armée), — (2 janvier 
1812.) Ce corps formera un des qua- 
tre de la Grande Armée, 151. — 
(10 janvier.) Infanterie et cavalerie qui 
le composeront, 163. — (23 février.) 
Ce corps passera le Rhin a& la fin de 
février pour se diriger sur Leipzig et 
Erfurt , 250. — (3 mars.) A partir du 
1 aviil, le corps d’observation de 


560 
l’Océan prendra le nom de 3° corps de 
la Grande Armée, 279. V. Guanox 
Ana. 

Cones p’onsenvaTion DE niisenve (de U'armée 
d Espagne). — (30 décembre 1811.) 
Dissolution de ce corps, 140. 

Cones p’onsenvaTion pg L'ITavig MERIDIO- 
nag, commandé par le général Grenier, 
346. 

Conps v’onservation p'Iraure (4° corps de 
la Grande Armée). — (16 décembre 
1811.) Organisation a donner a ce 
corps; instructions concernant les régi- 
meuls francais, Jes régiments étrangers 
et les régiments italiens; composition 
de I’artillerie et de la cavalerie, 86, 
89. — (28 décembre.) Ordre au vice- 
roi de hater la réunion des troupes du 
corps d'observalion d'Italie ; disposi- 
tions relatives 4 l’organisation de J’artil- 
lerie et du train, 123. — Mesures & 
prendre en vue de l'approvisionnement 
de ce corps; mode de transport & em- 
ployer, 124. — (30 décembre.) Ordre 
pour la formation d’un bataillon d’équi- 
pages militaires italien; le vice - roi 
portera son attention sur fa question 
des moyens de transport et sur celle 
des fours de campagne, 143, — (2 jan- 
vier 1812.) Organisation définitive du 
corps d’observation d'Italie, un des 
quatre de Ja Grande Armée, 152. — 
(3 janvier.) Le prince Eugéne prendra 
discrétement, toutes les mesures néces- 
saires pour que les trois divisions de 
son corps se tiennent prétes ase meltre 
en marche au premier moment; dépdt 
& former a Trente; dispositions tou- 
chant la remonte de la cavalerie et le 
service des équipages militaires, 155. 
— (13 janvier.) Ordre au vice-roi de 
former une compagnie de marins de Ja 
garde italienne, 17%. — (22 janvier. ) 
Création au corps d’observation d’Italie 
d'un bataillon d’équipages militaires 
ayant des altelages de baufs, 184. — 
(29 janvier.) Dispositions pour une 
prochaine mise en marche de l’armée 
du prince Exgéne, 197. — (7 février.) 
Il sera formé un corps d’ouvriers a la 
suite de l’équipage de pont du corps 
d’observation d’Italie, 208. — (8 fé- 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Fr. 


vrier:) Ordre au corps d'observalion 
d'Italie de se mettre en marche vere le 
Danube; il traversera le ‘I'yrol en neuf 
colonnes, 212. — Junot commanders 
le corps d'observation d'ltalic, sous lee 
ordres du vice-roi, 213. —= Inalitite 
tions concernant le mouvement preseril 
a l'armée da prince Eugéne; ello devia 
descendre « comme un torrent du haut 
du Brenner sur Je Danube»; nominie 
lion du général Charpentier comme 
chef d’état-major , 215. — (10 février, ) 
Ordre au vice-roi de hater son mouvéee 
ment vers Ratisbonne, 219. —~ (20 fi. 
vrier,) Neécessité de complétor |'effectif 
des régiments du 4° corps; les ditt» 
chements supplémentaires seront réunis 
& Vérone pour rejoindre 4 Ja fin de 
mars; observations sur !'état de situ 
tion des équipages militaires, 205, 
V. Granpg Arwge. 

Consarnrs. — (8 février 1812.) Défonne 
aux gouverneurs militaires d’avoir dvs 
intéréts dans Jes armements des cor 
saires, 215. 

Convisant (Baron), premier médecin de 
I'Empereur, 420. 

Corrs (Défense des). V. Marine (service 
général et constructions) 

Cnoatzs (Troupes). — (18 janvier 1812.) 
Ordre & Clarke de compléter l’organi: 
salion des troupes croates, 165. 

Cuxrures. — (30 décembre 1811.) Note 
dictée en conseil du commerce et des 
manufactures: nécessilé d’encourager Ia 
culture de la betterave en établissant 
une quantité de fabriques de sucre pro= 
portionnée aux semailles; évaluation 
du rendement annuel des plants; exa~ 
men de la question aux points de vue 
économique et politique, 133 4 135, 
— (6 janvier 1812.) Ordre au ministre 
de l'intérieur de faire un rapport sur la 
culture de Ja betterave; disposition con- 
cernant les prochaines semailles, 158. 

Curia, (Baron), général de division, 300, 

Cusrincver (Jean), concierge de la légation 
russe a Paris, 275. 

Czaaronysxi (Adam), prince, 443. 

Czerxrrcusr (Comte pe), colonel , aide de 
camp de l’empereur de Russie, 253, 
273, 275. 








TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 561 


D 


Daunoets, général de division, 192, 217, 
244, 277, 355, 376, 378, 428, 453. 

Dacneau , armateur, 28. 

Damas, général de division, 194, 217, 
219, 279. 

Daxguarx. — (20 novembre 1811.) Plain- 
tes de Napoléon au sujet de la contre- 
bande anglaise dans le Danemark; 
démarches a faire 4 Copenhague pour 
y mettre un terme, 23. — (4 février 
1812.) Ordre au ministre des relations 
extérieures d'entrer en négocialion avec 
le Danemark pour un achat de chevaux, 
204. — (29 mars.) Alliance conclue 
avec le Danemark en vue de la pro- 
chaine campagne; contingent qui sera 
fourni par ce pays, en cas de descente 
des Anglais, 348. — (22 avril.) Aux 
termes du traité conclu avec I'Empe- 
reur, 12,000 Danois se porlteront, le 
cas échéant, sur l'Oder ou le Zuider- 
zee, 382. 

Dayz (Duc px). V. Lerepure. 

Dayzic, ville forte de Prusse, oceupée par 
les Francais. — (13 décembre 1811.) 
Instructions concernant ]’approvisionne- 
ment de Danzig, 73. — (13 janvier 
1812.) Ordres sur le méme sujet, 165. 
— (le juin.) Ordre a la division Daen- 
dels d’occuper Danzig et de défendre de 
la les cdtes de la Baltique, 453, 456, — 
(9 juin.) Composition de la garnison de 
Danzig , 475. — (9 juin.) Mesures a 
prendre pour mettre cette place a l’abri 
d'un coup de main; le commandant 
sera changé , 476. , 

Danu (Comte) , ministre secrétaire d’Etat , 
175, 257, 258, 280. 

Daumesni, (Baron), général de brigade, 
188. 

Davgtours , 24, 

Davour, duc d'Auerstaedt, prince d’Eck- 
mith], maréchal commandant le corps 
d’observation de I'Elbe (1° corps de la 
Grande Armée). — (14 novembre 
1811.) Instructions & Davout dans la 
prévision d’hostilités de Ja part de la 
Prusse; le prince d’Eckmiihl envelop- 
perait toutes les garnisons prussiennes 
jusqu’a la Vistule, 14, 15. — (15 no- 
vembre,) Préparatifs a faire pour pou- 
voir, le cas échéant, lier les mains 4 la 
Prusse; des équipages de siége seront 
dirigés contre Spandau et Kolberg, 15, 


XXIII. 


16. — (24 novembre.) Ordre 4 Davout 
denvoyer 4 I'Empereur un état de Ia 
situation de ses troupes; forces dont 
pourra disposer ce maréchal; garnisous 
a mettre dans les places de Glogau et 
de Magdeburg , 34, 35. — (2 décem- 
bre.) Napoléon recommande a Davout 
de ne point ajouter créance aux pré- 
tendus bruits d’une insurrection de |’Al- 
lemagne; la dignité du prince d’Eck- 
mihl et la haute importance de ses 
fonctions exigent qu'il vive en dehors 
de ces rumeurs, 44, 45. — (19 dé- 
cembre.) Question au prince d'Eckmih! 
au sujet d’une commande éventuelle de 
voitures de transports militaires, 95.— 
(9 février 1812.) Préparatifs prescrits & 
Davout pour un mouvement secret de 
son corps vers la Vistule, 218, — 
(21 février.) Ordre au prince d'Eck- 
mihl de commencer son mouvement 
sans délai, 242. — (3 mars.) Le ma- 
réchal Davout disposera son corps de 
maniére qu’en deux jours il puisse pas- 
ser I'Oder; son avant-garde correspon- 
dra avec le prince Poniatowski, 278. 
— (6 mars.) Echelonnement prescrit 
aux divisions de Davout, a partir du 
15 mars; elles devront, dés que !'Em- 
pereur aura envoyé l’ordre de marche, 
arriver sur la Vistule en dix ou douze 
jours, 286. — (16 mars.) Au cas ot 
les Russes commenceraient Jes hustili- 
tés, le 1°° corps, avec Davout, con- 
tiendrait l’ennemi sur Je Niemen, 314. 
— Ordre au prince d’Eckmihl de por- 
ter son quartier général 4 Thorn, 316, 
— (25 mars.) Le langage de Davout 
devra, jusqu’a nouvel ordre, rester pa- 
cifique; il évitera toute reconnaissance 
militaire au dela de la Vistule, 339, — 
(30 mars.) Défense au prince d’Eckmihl 
de faire aucun mouvement offensif avant 
d'en avoir recu l'ordre, 348, 351. — 
(22 mai.) Neécessité pour Davout de 
tenir tout son corps concentré sur la 
rive droite de la Vistule, 418. — Fixa- 
tion du traitement du prince d'Eckmihl, 
419. — (26 mai.) Instructions 4 Da- 
vout pour le mouvement de son corps 
darmée ; I'Empereur lui recommande 
de s'embarrasser le moins possible de 
bagages, 432. — (4 juin.) Ordre au 
prince dEckmihl de metire un terme 


36 


562 


aux pillages des Wurtembergeois, qui 
fourragent en tous sens dans la Polo- 
gne, 465. — (5 juin.) Davout recevra 
Yordre d’occuper les bords de la Pregel , 
Insterburg, Wehlau et Keenigsberg , 
472. — (6 juin.) Méme ordre au prince 
@’Eckmithl, 474. — (10 juin.) I diri- 
gera sa cavalerie Iégére sur Geeleborg , 
479. — (15 juin.) Ordre 4 Davout de 
s'établir &@ Wilkowyszki, 496, 499. — 
(20 juin.) Précautions a prendre par le 
prince d’Eckmiihl pour ne pas démas- 
quer trop tot son mouvement, 520. — 
(21 juin.) Il se portera avec son corps 
d’armée dans Ja direction de Kovno , 
524, — (25 juin.) Davout a Roum- 
chichki, 537. — (26 juin.) Ordre a 
ce maréchal de réunir son armée et de 
la faire reposer, 541. V. Gaanpe Anuie. 

Decaen, général de division, a I'armée 
d Espagne, 21, 110, 111, 262, 356. 

Décisions , 200 , 242. 

Decrés (Comte) , vice-amiral, ministre de 
Ja marine, 70. V. Marine, 

Décrets. — (9 décembre 1811.) Décret 
abolissant le régime féodal dans les trois 
nouveaux déparlements du Nord, 62. 

Dersrwon (Comte), ministre d'Elat, inten- 
dant général du domaine extraordinaire. 
V. Domaine extraorviname, 

Derraxce (Comte), général de division, 
248. 

Buseay (Baron) , général de brigade, a la 
Grande Armée, 103, 105. 

Detasonvg (Comte), général de division , 
300, 335, 337, 339, 354, 411, 451, 
507, 516, 524. 

Deort pz Guton (Baron) , général de bri- 
gade, 103. 

Descuamps, commissaire ordonnateur des 
guerres , 487. 

Dussarx (Baron), général de division, a 
la Grande Armée, 183, 218, 279, 286, 
330, 550. 

Dessoutg, général de division, 356, 
547. 

Dernis, général de division, 501. 

Deux-Sicites. — (26 janvier 1812.) Des- 
titution da chargé d’affaires de France 
a Naples, 186. — (17 mai. ) Mesures 
prises pour la défense du royaume des 
Deux-Siciles pendant lacampagne contre 
les Russes, 404. — (23 mai.) Ordres 

concernant le méme objet, 422, 423, 
4Q4, 

Dirromatique (Corps), — (16 février 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie, 


1812.) Ordre au ministre dos yolations 
extérieures de remplacer deux agosils 
francais a I'étranger, 224.—(25 avell,) 
Hl sera établi des consuls frangais due 
les places de Kolberg, Elbing , Kanijiu= 
berg, Memel, Riga, Rostock, Winmar , 
Stralsund et Altona, 385. 

Doxrouror , général russe, 550, 

Domaine pe u'Erar. — (17 janvier 1819%,) 
Opportunité d’abattre une avenue d'or- 
mes, prés de Brienne : question adres« 
sée sur ce sujet au ministre des finances, 
181. 

Domaine Extraonpinaine. — (16 janvier 
1812.) Rachat, par le grand-due de 
Hesse-Darmstadt , de diverses proprid« 
tés allemandes faisant partie du domaine 
extraordinaire; observations de I'limpd» — 
reur au sujet de Ja convention conclue 
a cet égard, 177. —( 6 février.) Ordre 
a Defermon de verser a la Socidté do 
charité maternelle diverses sommes qul 
lui sont dues, 206. 

Doumancer (Baron), général de brigade , 
a la réserve de cavalerie, 332. 

Donvis (Baron) , général de brigade, i Ia 
Grande Armée, 103, 105, 

Donszane (Comte), général de division , 
a l’'armée d'Espagne, 22, 80, 138, 
187, 189, 279. 

Dotations. — (1% janvier 1812.) Ré- 
ponse de l'Empereur & une demande de 
supplément de dotation faite par le duc 
de Padoue, 175. 

Dovangs. — (10 janvier 1812. ) Nomina- 
tion de Collin, comte de Sussy, comme 
ministre des manufactures et du com- 
merce; la surveillance de |’administra- 
tion des douanes sera dans ses attribu- 
tions , 163. 

Doumerc (Baron) , général de division, 4 
la réserve de cavalerie, 41, 61, 105, 
153, 164, 249 , 308. 

Domanom-1e-Petiry , contre-amiral, 426, 

Dumas (Comte) , général de division, di- 
recleur des revues et de la conscription 
militaire, 90, 94. 

Dumvy (Baron) , général de division, 439. 

Duranp, maison de commerce, 126. 

Duroc, duc de Frioul , général de division, 
grand maréchal du palais, 175. 

Dunosyeu (Comte ) » général de division , 
aide de camp del Empereur, 102, 376, 
429, 509. 

Donurre (Baron), général de division , 
383, 408, 454. 





TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 563 


Eo (Baron pv’) , général commandant les 
équipages de pont de la Grande Armée, 
31, 343, 389, 463, 472, 478, 531, 
535, 540, 542, 546. V. Gnranne 
Anatiz, 

Eckuvat (Prince p’). V. Davovr. 


Kiisa Napouiton , grande-duchesse de Tos-~ 


cane, 310. 

Empsciwapo (L’), chef de troupes insur- 
rectionnelles en Espagne, 21. 

Eus-Ontentat (Département del’) , 142. 

LQUIPAGES DE Pont. V. ArTILLsniE. 

Kourraces murrames. V. Gurare (Admi- 
nistration de la ). 

Ennour, général de division , 242. 

Espacye (Opérations en). — (19 novembre 
1811.) Succés remportés par l'armée du 
Midi; nécessité de s'emparer le plus tdt 
possible de Valence; ordres 4 trans- 
mettre en conséquence au maréchal 
Suchet, qui sera soutenu, au besoin, 
par Reille et Marmont; retraite de Mina 
dans le nord de la Péninsule; marche 
de Decaen sur Barcelone , 21, 22. — 
L’Empereur se plaint de ne pas rece~ 
voir des rapports réquliers de ses géné- 
raux en Espagne, 22. — (20 novem- 
bre.) Observations au major général de 
Varmée d’Espagne sur le genre de guerre 
& faire aux insurgés dans la Péninsule : 
on substituera des colonnes mobiles et 
disséminées aux corps compactes el sta- 
tionnaires, 27.—(6 décembre.) Précau- 
tions prises par I'Empereur pour protéger, 
Je cas échéant, la frontiére pyrénéenne 
contre les incursions des bandes espagno- 
les, 54, 55. — Cause des pertes es- 
suyées par l'armée de Catalogne ; insalu- 
brité de 'Ampurdan pour les troupes, 
56. — Instructions pour les ducs de 
Raguse et de Dalmatie; blame exprimé 
par Napoléon a propos d'une maneuvre 
toalheureuse du général Girard ; recom- 
mandation expresse de n’opposer que de 
grandes masses aux Anglais; opérations 
prescrites a Soult dans le midi de Ja 
Péninsule, 59, —(24 décembre.) Dis- 
tribution d'un onziéme convoi de fonds 
entre les divers corps de l'armée d'Es- 
pagne, 102. — (26 décembre.) Me- 
sures 4 prendre pour assurer, au moyen 
de voilures rouliéres, ]'approvisionne- 
ment de Barcelone ; premiéres opérations 
du siége de Valence; instructions pour 


Je général Decaen, 110, 111. — 
(29 décembre.) Explications concer- 
nant les opérations & entreprendre, par 
Yentremise d’une maison de commerce, 
afin de fournir 4 Barcelone et aux trou- 
pes francaises en Espagne les munitions 
de bouche nécessaires, 125, 129, — 
(30 décembre. ) Instructions 4 trans- 
mettre a Suchet; ce maréchal conservera 
le gouvernement de Valence et le com- 
mandement du 3° corps ; rdle assigné au 
général Reille; création d’an corps 
@armée de UEbre; le corps d'observa- 
tion de réserve sera dissous, 136, 140. 
— (7 janvier 1812.) Envoi d'un dou- 
ziéme convoi de fonds pour les armées 
d'Espagne et de Portugal, 161. — 
(9 janvier.) Mesures & prendre pour 
assurer le ravitaillement de Barcelone 
et, a l'occasion, la défense de Tarra- 
gone, 162. — (25 janvier.) Organisa- 
tion de la Catalogne en quatre départe- 
ments, 185, — (27 janvier. ) Marche 
des Anglais sur Ciudad-Rodrigo; ordre 
a Dorsenne de soutenir Marmont; im- 
portance du mouvement prescrit 
Montbrun, 187. — (11 février.) Me- 
sures a prendre par Marmont pour se- 
courir l’armée du Midi; il doit s’établir 
offensivement de Salamanque a Almeida, 
et se préparer 4 marcher sur Ciudad- 
Rodrigo , 220. — (18 féevrier.) Ordre 
de faire partir pour la Catalogne les 
intendants, les préfets et les sous-préfets 
nouvellement préposés al'administration 
de cette province , 228. — Fautes com- 
mises par le duc de Raguse; aprés 
avoir manqué l'occasion de reprendre 
Ciudad-Rodrigo, ce maréchal doit se 
fortifier 4 Salamanque, tandis que le duc 
de Dalmatie empéchera le corps du gé- 
néral Hill de se réunir 4 Wellington ; au 
cas ou cette jonclion viendrait néan- 
moins & s’opérer, Marmont serait ren- 
forcé par l'armée du Nord; d'un autre 
cété, ce n'est qu’en conservant les 
Asturies que le duc de Raguse peut , 
aprés une bataille perdue, assurer sa 
retraite ; exposé des conséquences qu’out 
entrainées depuis quelque temps les 
fausses manwuvres de Marmont et l'in- 
opportune dissémination de son armée ; 
en résumé, la conquéle du Portugal 
dépend de !a conduite ullérieure de ce 


36. 


564 


maréchal : il faut qu'il laisse 4 l’armée 
du Midi, forte de 80,000 hommes, le 
soin de contenir une partie des Anglais 
sur la rive gauche du Tage, et qu'il 
prépare tout pour une nouvelle offensive 
sur Ciudad-Rodrigo, 228 4 235. — 
(21 février.) Nouvelle faute de Mar- 
mont; il n’a pas compris les intentions 
de |'Empereur sur Valence ; ce monve- 
ment devait avoir lieu par Cuenca et 
avec des forces relativement considéra- 
bles, 244. — Ordre au duc de Raguse 
de faire réoccuper Jes Asturies par la 
division Bonet; Napoléon insiste sur 
l'importance de cette position, que Mar- 
mont, dans aucun cas, ne doit évacuer ; 

uant 4 Badajoz, d’ailleurs défendue 
par les 80,000 hommes du dne de Dal- 
matie, si Wellington la menagait , le duc 
de Raguse J’arréterait par une diversion 
triomphante en marchant sur Ciudad- 
Rodrigo et Almeida ; en résumé, le plan 
qui est prescrit est toujours le méme : 
s'établir fortement 4 Salamanque sans 
abandonner Jes montagnes du nord, et, 
de 1a, contenir les Anglais, 245. — 
(29 février.) L’Empereur continue de 
craindre les incursions des bandes espa- 
gnoles sur la frontiére pyrénéenne; di- 
vision de réserve chargée, sous les 
ordres du général Travot, de concourir, 
avec les gardes nationales et les chas- 
seuy's des montagnes , & la défense des dé- 
partements limitrophes, 260 a 263. 
— (8 mars.) Ordre au général Reille 
de déloger de la Cerdagne frangaise les 
insurgés espagnols, 296.—(12 mars, ) 
Confirmation des derniéres instructions 
données au duc de Raguse : il doit ou 
reteniren échec sur la rive droite du Tage 
la plus grande partie de l’armée an- 
glaise , ou , si celle-ci s'affaiblit de quel- 
ques divisions , prendre hardiment l'of- 
fensive et investir Almeida; c’est d]’armée 
du Midi que reviendra pendant ce temps 
la tache de défendre Badajoz , 306. — 
(16 mars. ) Le roi Joseph est revétu du 
commandement en chef de toutes les 
armées francaises en Espagne, 313. — 
(29 mars.) Occupation des Asturies 
par les insurgés espagnols; plaintes de 
YEmpereur a ce sujet, 349. —(3 avril.) 
Ordre & Reille de se rendre en Aragon 
pour prendre le commandement de cetle 
province; la Catalogne sera sous les 
ordres de Decaen; sur le Tage, le suc- 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie. 


cés des opérations dépend du duo de 
Raguse, auquel |'Empereur laisse cayli 
blanche, 356. — (8 avril.) Envoid'un 
treiziéme et d'un quatorzié¢me convoi di 
fonds 4 l’armée d’Espagne, 362, 
(28 mai. ) Ordre au général L'Huillier 
de se maintenir en mesure de pouvoir 
secourir, le cas échéant, Saint-Sébas« 
tien, 447. 


Essen (Comte pv’), commandant un corps 


russe, 484, 496. 


Esrarerres. — (13 mars 1812.) Ovdve 


relatif aux estafettes 4 établir de Paris 4 

Berlin, 308. — (16 mars.) Organisax 

tion du service d’estafette entre Paris ot 
_ la Grande Armée , 325. 


Eratssarsanesoues. V. Bansanesques (Etats), 
Evetne Naroxtoy , vice-roi d'ltalie. 


(8 février 1812.) Ordre au vice-roi 
d’ébranler les colonnes de son corps 
d'armée dans la direction du Dannbe ; 
instructions relatives au passage des 
troupes dans les montagnes du ‘I'yrol ; 
le prince Eugéne fera partir ses équipa~ 
ges, tout en demeurant jusqu’a nouvel 
ordre 4 Milan, 212, 213. — Nouvelles 
instructions dans le méme sens au vice~ 
roi, 215. — (10 février.) Le prince 
Eugéne tachera d’avancer d’une semaine 
T'arrivée de sa téte de colonne a Ratis- 
bonne; il passera par Paris avant de 
rejoindre son corps 4 Dresde, 219. — 
(3 mars, ) L'Empereur reproche au.vice- 
roi d’avoir causé par sa négligence la 
perte du vaisseau le Rivoli, pris par les 
Anglais , 281. — (28 mars. ) Ordre au 
prince Eugéne de se tenir prét a venir 
4 Paris, pour se rendre de Ja 4 Glogau 
et rejoindre son corps d'armée, 347. 
— (17 avril.) Méme ordre au vice-roi, 
370. — (30 avril.) Le prince Eugéne 
se rendra & Plock pour y accélérer la 
formation de ses magasins; forces mises 
sous son commandement, 391. — 
(21 mai.) Ordre au vice-roi de porter 
son avant-garde a Willenberg , 414. — 
(26 mai.) Son prochain quartier général 
sera Soldau, 433. — (1¢* juin. ) Re- 
connaissance de divers points de la fron- 
tiére russe 4 faire faire par le prince 
Eugéne , 458. — Le vice-roi est mandé 
a Thorn prés de l'Empereur, 460. — 
(5 juin.) Ordre au prince Kugéne de 
s'avancer dans Ja direction de Rasten- 
burg, 469. —(10 juin. ) Son quartier 
général devra étre le 14 4 Pullusk, et 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


le 17 & Ostrolenka; c’est au vice-roi 
qu'il appartient de tomber sur la droite 
des Russes, dans le cas ow ils s'ébran- 
leraient; sinon, il se bornera, par des 
mouvements calculés pour occuper !'en- 
nemi vers Grodno et Bialystok , a faci- 
liter le passage du Niemen 4 I'aile gau- 
che de la Grande Armée, 480. — Le 
prince Eugéne reculera sa ligne d’opé- 
rations sur Thorn et Osterode; mais il 
s'arrangera toujours pour tomber, le cas 
échéant , sur la droite des Russes ; l'Em- 
pereur lui indique les points ot il devra, 
le moment venu, passer le Niemen, 480. 
— (11 juin.) Maneuvres prescrites au 
prince Eugéne en vue du mouvement de 
Bagration sur Brzesc et le Niemen; il doit 
se serrer d'une part contre le corps du roi 
Jéréme , et de l'autre contre le gros de 
Yarmée , 486. — (15 juin. ) Ordre au 


565 


vice-roi de porter son quartier général 
4 Oletzko, 496. — (17 juin.) Le 
prince Eugéne ajournera son mouvement 
jusqu’a ce qu'il ait réuni des vivres en 
quantité suffisante , 508. —- (19 juin. ) 
L’Empereur ordonne 4 Eugéne Napoléon 
de continuer sa marche sur Oletzko, 
512. — (20 juin. ) Point présumé ot 
le vice-roi franchira le Niemen, 516. — 
(21 juin.) Ordre 4 Eugéne Napoléon de 
se porter sur Maryampol, afin de passer 
le fleuve 4 Kovno ou 4 Preny , 524, — 
(25 juin.) Instructions au vice-roi pour 
qu'il se tienne prét a franchir le Niemen, 
540. — (26 juin.) Ile passera dans la 
nuit du 27 au 28, a Piloni, ou un pont 
sera jeté par Eblé, 542, V. Gnanvg Arnie. 

Events, chef de bataillon , 12. 

Exztaans (Baron), général de brigade , 
188. 


F 


Faure ps Gitnz (Baron), général de bri- 
gade, désigné pour commander J'artil- 
lerie de la réserve de cavalerie de la 
Grande Armée, 31, 48. , 

Fay, fabricant de sucre de betterave, 134. 

Fetrag (Duc ve). V. Crarke. 

Fionan (Régime). —(9 décembre 1811.) 
Abolition du régime féodal dans le dé- 
partement de I’Ems-Supérieur, des Bou- 
ches-du-Weser et des Bouches-de-l’Elbe ; 
effets généraux de cette abolition; nou- 
veaux réglements législatifs ; suppression 
des droits seigneuriaux et féodaux; arti- 
cles concernant les corvées; fixation des 
indemuités, 62 a 67. 

Fenetigr , capitaine de frégate, — (25 dé- 
cembre 1811.) Instructions a cet offi- 
cier, chargé de croiser, avec une divi- 
sion, dans I'Océan, 108. 

Fenniire, général de brigade, 103, 105, 
153. 

Fivances. — (24 novembre 1811.) Fonds 
affectés 4 la constrnction de la route de 
Wesel; rapport 4 faire par Gaudin sur 
cette question , 34. 

Frevaus (Duc pz). V. Jourpay. 

Frorence. V. Menprcrré (Dépéts de). 

Fongstrer, capitaine, 118. 

Fonirs, V. Marine (constructions). 

Fovnnter (Baron), général de brigade, 147. 

Francors Il, empereur d’Autriche. — 
(3 avril 1812.) Napoléon remercie Fran- 
cois Ii de ses assurances d’amitié; il 


espére en la durée de l'alliance conclue 
entre la France et I’Autriche , 358, — 
(26 mai.) Francois IJ 4 Dresde, auprés 
de Napoléon, 433. V. Aurnicne. 

Faépinic, roi de Wurtemberg. — (11 mai 
1812.) L’Empereur remercie ce souve- 
rain des veux qu'il lui a exprimés pour 
la réussite de ses projets, 404. 

Frivgric-Aucustg, roi de Saxe, duc de 
Varsovie, 441. V. Saxg, Varsovie 
(Grand-duché de). 

Fresia, général de division italien, 437. 

Friant (Comte), général de division, a la 
Grande Armée, 183, 218, 541, 545. 

Fatout (Duc vs). V. Duroc. 

Froytiines (Défense des). — (6 décembre 
1811.) Nécessité de pourvoir 4 la dé- 
fense des frontiéres pyrénéennes; il sera 
organisé, dans cette vue, une garde 
nationale dans les départements limi- 
trophes; chacun d’eux fournira en outre 
deux bataillons d’élite, et l'on conservera 
les hataillons de chasseurs des monta- 
gnes, 54, 55. — (29 février 1812.) 
Réunion sur la frontiére pyrénéenne 
d'une division de réserve commandéc 
par le général Travot ; positions que ce 
général devra occuper dans la monta- 
gne; composition de sa division ; main- 
tien des gardes nationales de la contrée 
et des chasseurs des montagnes ; nécessité 
de rectifier la frontiére de facon a pos- 
séder tous les pendants des caux, 260. 


566 


Gayreaume (Comte), vice-amiral, 308. 


G 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie. 


Lefebvre, 366. — (4 juin.) Réunion 


Ganpe mrznrace. — (16 décembre 181].) de Ja Garde 4 Thorn, 467. — (9 juin,) 


Ordre au ministre de la guerre de 
metire Ja Garde en état d’entrer en 
campagne; instructions concernant la 
cavalerie, J'infanterie et l'artillerie de 
velte arme, 83. — (21 décembre.) 
Comment doit étre organisée J’adminis- 
tration de Ja Garde : ordonnateurs , 
commissaires des guerres, ouvriers , 
équipages militaires, etc. , 98. — Me- 
sures prises pour completer |’effectif de 
la cavalerie de la Garde, 99. — Avis 
4 Bessiéres au sujet de l’organisation du 
génie de la Garde impériale, 100. — 
(23 décembre.) Artillerie de la Garde 
rappelée d'Espagne , 101, — (27 jan- 
vier 1812.) Observations sur T’état- 
major de Ja Garde; jugement sur divers 
officiers auxquels !Empereur désirerait 
confier un commandement, 188. 
(8 féevrier). Ordre a Bessiéres de faire 
partir secrétement pour Bruxelles Ja pre- 
miere division de la Garde, 214, — 
(19 février.) Instructions au duc d’Istrie 
pour qu'il expédie divers détachements 
de la Garde vers Mayence ; ces mouve- 
ments devront se faire de nuit et avec 
le plus grand secret , 24}. — (10 mars. ) 
Nouveaux ordres a Bessiéres pour la 
mise en marche de la Garde vers 
Mayence et vers l'Elbe ; composition 
de l'infanterie , de la cavalerie, de l’ar- 
tillerie et du génie, 299. — Prescrip- 
tions relatives aux aigles et fanions , 
301. — (14 mars.) Dispositions pour 
expédier en poste, de Bayonne a Paris, 
huit bataillons de la Garde, 309. — 
Ordre concernant le mouvement suc- 
cessif de la Garde vers la Vistule, 315. 
— (18 mars.) Le maréchal Bessiéres la 
dirigera sur Wiirzburg, 327. 
(25 mars.) Instructions relatives & ce 
mouvement, 336. — (2 avril.) L’Em- 
pereur réclame un état de la situation 
et du mouvement de Ja Garde, 354.— 
(3 avril.) Projet de former de la Garde 
deux commandements quiseraient données 
aux maréchaux Mortier et Lefebvre, 355. 
— (4 avril.) Ordre concernant le départ 
pour la Grande Armée des derniers 
détachements de la Garde , 358. — 
(10 avril.) Le commandement de la 


Mouvement de la premitre division de 
la Garde sur Keenigsberg, 477, = 
(10 juin.) Ordre a la division do la 
vieille Garde de se porter de Heilshory 
sur Schippenbeil, 478. — La Garde 
impériale maneuvrera, vers le 20, pour 
passer le Niemen, 482. — (13 juin.) 
Ordre 4 Bessiéres et 4 Lefebvre do 
se diriger sur Insterburg, 488, —— 
(16 juin.) La Garde, marchant sur 
Insterburg, fera étape 4 Tapiau, 504, — 
(19 juin.) Approvisionnements dont la 
Garde devra se munir avant de quitter 
Insterburg , 513. — (20 juin.) Ordre 
a Ja Garde de partir pour Stallupehnen, 
513. — Ordre du jour concernant la 
Garde, au moment du passage du Nie+ 
men, 520. — (21 juin.) Mouvement 
prescrit 4 Bessiéres et Lefebvre en avant 
de Wilkowyszki, 524, V. Graypg Annie. 


Ganvrs nationates. — (6 décembre 181].) 


Nécessité de pourvoir a la défense des 
frontiéres pyrénéennes par l’organisa~ 
tion des gardes nationales dans les dé~ 
parlements des Pyrénées-Orientales, de 
lAriége, de la Haute-Garonne et des 
Hautes- Pyrénées, 54. — (3 mars 
1812.) Note sur un projet d'organisa- 
tion de Ja garde nationale : la création 
de ces cohortes donnera une nouvelle 
armée a l'intérieur ; instructions pour 
Ja rédaction du décret a intervenir : 
cette milice, qui ne sortira point des 
frontiéres , comprendra un premier ban, 
un deuxiéme et un arriére-ban; les 
commandements seront déférés a des 
généraux sénateurs, 281. — (2 avril.) 
Ordres relatifs 4 l’embrigadement des 
cohortes de gardes nationales, 353. — 
(26 mai.) Instructions sur l’emplace- 
ment des cohortes, 430. — (13 juin.) 
Ordre d’envoyer une demi-brigade 4 
Bayonne, 486. — (16 juin.) L’Empe- 
reur presse la formation des cohortes et 
Yenvoi 4 Bayonne d'un certain nombre 
de brigades de Normandie, 501. — 
(21 juin.) Ordres dans le méme sens 
au ministre de la guerre, 522. 


Ganzau (Baron), général de brigade, 260. 
Gauran (Baron), général de brigade , 


105, 153. 


vieille Garde est confié au maréchal Gexpaaurs v’orponwance, — (2 avril 1812.) 





TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 567 


Projet de I’Empereur de eréer plusieurs 
compagnies de ces gendarmes, 354. 
Gites. V. Manne (service général et con- 
structions), 

Gin. — (4 décembre 1811.) Observa- 
tions relatives 4 la formation des équi- 
pages du génie de la Grande Armée, 
49. — (5 décembre.) Instructions con- 
cernant les travaux et l’armement de 
Modlin, 52 4 54. — (12 décembre. ) 
Représentations sévéres au ministre de 
Ja guerre sur la non-exécution du décret 
relatif aux batteries de la Gironde et de 
Tile d’Oleron, 69. — (14 décembre.) 
Composition du matériel du génie de la 
Grande Armée, 74, — (30 décembre. ) 
Compagnies de sapeurs et de mineurs a 
incorporer dans la Grande Armée, 135. 
— (13 janvier 1812.) Ordres relatifs 
4 l’armement de Gliickstadt et a la dé- 
fense des cétes de la mer du Nord, 
166. — (28 janvier.) Note dictée en 
conseil des fortifications : travaux a 
faire pour la défense des fles hollan- 
daises de Goeree, Schouwen et Zierick- 
zee, 192. — (29 janvier.) Dispositions 
a prendre pour créer un établissement 
militaire a Delfzyl , 195. —(18 février.) 
Mesures concernant l|’armement des 
edtes du Mecklenburg , des bouches de 
l'Elbe, du Weser et de la Jahde; im- 
portance des places de Delfzyl, Coc- 
verden et Gorcum; instructions relatives 
aux forts Lasalle, Duquesne, Montebello 
et Saint-Hilaire, en Hollande, 225. — 
(19 février.) Ordre de démolir toutes 
les constructions qui génent les fortifi- 
cations de Magdeburg , 240. — (26 fé- 
vrier.) Mesures & prendre pour assu- 
rer la défense de Stralsund, 253. — 
(1¢ mars.) Tracé des travaux 4 exéculer 
au Helder, 271. — (25 mars.) Ordre 


au prince d’Eckmihl de faire construire’ 


une redoute a la pointe du Nehrung, 
339. — (12 avril.) Instructions concer- 
nant l'armement des fles Saint-Marcouf, 
367. — (7 mai.) Mesures 4 prendre 
pour l’armement de Magdeburg, 398. 
— (26 mai.) Observations sur les dispo- 
sitions adoptées pour mettre Pillauen état 
de défense , 431, 432. V. Granog Arnie, 
Ginsro (Baron), général de brigade, 
105, 12%, 153. 

Gisarv (Baron), général de division, 59, 
153, 396. 

Govxcavp , capitaine , officier d'ordonnance 


de |'/Empereur. —(31 décembre 1811.) 
Mission confiée 4 Gourgaud ; il inspec- 
tera les bataillons de réfractaires des 
fles de Ré, d’Aix et d’Oleron, et visi- 
tera les batteries de la céte jusqu’a la 
Gironde, 148. 


Gouvion Samr-Cvr (Comte pz), général 


commandant le 6¢ corps de la Grande 
Armée, 277, 330, 371, 480, 481, 
518. V. Gaanpe Aras. 


Gnanpe Armée. (Organisation et mouve- 


ments.) — (23 novembre 1811.) Orga- 
nisation du service diartillerie de la 
Grande Armée, 29 a 33. — (2 janvier 
1812.) Note sur l’organisation de la 
Grande Armée, comprenant provisoire- 
ment 4 corps, 15 divisions d’infanterie, 
13 brigades de cavalerie légére et 6 di- 
visions de réserve de cavalerie, 151.— 
(16 janvier.) Berthier est nommé major 
général de la Grande Armée, 180. — 
(24 janvier.) Instructions concernant 
les équipages militaires , 184.—(30 jan- 
vier. ) Observations au major général 
sur les états de la Grande Armée, 198. 
— (6 février.) Ordre concernant Jes 
équipages de siége dela Grande Armée, 
207. — (23 février.) Questions 4 la 
Riboisiére au snjet du pare général 
d’artillerie de la Grande Armée; I’Em- 
pereur désire savoir 4 quelle époque il 
pourra passer le Rhin, 250. — (27 fé- 
vrier.) Emploi 4 faire des Espagnols 
dans la Grande Armée; réflexions sur 
Ja possibilité d’amalgamer ces deux élé- 
ments, francais et étranger, 257. — 
(3 mars.) Un 5° corps de la Grande 
Armée sera formé par les troupes polo- 
naises, sous le commandement de Po- 
niatowski; les Bavarois , avec Saint-Cyr, 
composeront le 6¢; les Saxons le 7¢; 
les Westphaliens le 8. — Les Wur- 
tembergeois formeront la 25° division, 
et les brigades de Berg, de Hesse- 
Darmstadt et de Bade, avec Daendels , 
Ja 26°. — Les deux corps d'observation 
de l'Elbe prendront le nom de 1¢ et 
2¢ corps. Le corps d’observation de 
I'Océan s’appellera 3° corps, et le corps 
d'observation d'Italie , 4° corps , 277. 
— Ordre aux Bavarois de se rendre a 
Glogau, 280. — (6 mars.) Davout 
échelonnera les divisions du 1¢" corps 
de maniére qu’elles puissent, au pre- 
mier signal , franchir I'Oder et se por- 
ter rapidement sur la Vistule, 286. — 


568 CORRESPONDANCE 


(11 mars.) Ordre relatif au recrute- 
ment des régiments de la Vistule, et & 
la mise en marche vers le Grand-Duché 
des troupes polonaises qui sont en 
France, 305. — (12 mars.) L'Empe- 
reur réclame du ministre de la guerre 
un état explicite de la situation de la 
cavalerie de la Grande Armée, 306.,— 
(13 mars.) Ordre a Oudinot de se tenir 
prét 4 porter le 2¢ corps sur Berlin, 
307. — (14 mars.) Adjonction a la 
Grande Armée de 4,000 hommes de 
troupes de marine, qui seront dirigées 
sur Magdeburg et Danzig, 309. — La 
campagne de la Grande Armée s'ou- 
vrira par Jes siéges de Dinabourg et de 
Riga; instructions adressées en consé- 
quence au général la Riboisiére , 311. 
— (16 mars.) Mouvements prescrits & 
ouverture des hostilités aux différents 
corps de la Grande Armée : le roi de 
Westphalie prendra le commandement 
de l'aile droite, formée des 5¢, 7¢ et 
8° corps, et maneuvrera de facon & 
couvrir Varsovie: le 1¢" corps contien- 
dra l'ennemi sur le Niemen; le 2¢, le 
3° et le 4° marcheront sur Thorn; le 
grand quartier général sera 4 Berlin le 
1° avril, 314. — Ordre a Ney de pe- 
Jotonner son corps de Leipzig 4 Torgau 
et a Wittenberg, 315. — Mouvements 
prescrits 4 diverses divisions du corps 
d’Oudinot, 315. — Entrée prochaine 
du 2¢ corps 4 Berlin; marche en avant 
des autres troupes de la Grande Armée 
vers la frontiére russe; & moins d'une 
offensive de J'ennemi, le quartier géné- 
ral du prince d'Eckmiihl sera Thorn; 
mouvement des Saxons sur Kalisz et du 
corps westphalien sur Varsovie, 316. 
— Marche des Bavarois et de l’armée 
@italie sur Glogau, 316, 319. — Or- 
ganisation des services administratifs de 
la Grande Armée; dépéts & Berlin, 
Francfort-sur-I'Oder, Hanovre; division 
des services en divers arrondissements ; 
routes de communication, hdpitaux, 
convois, approvisionnements, 319 a 
326. — (19 mars.) Ordre a la cavalerie 
des 2°, 3¢ et 4° corps de se porter en 
avant de Torgau, 327, — Instructions 
sur les dispositions 4 prendre pour 
compléter l'effectif du 4¢ corps; itiné- 
raire 4 lui prescrire, 327. — (20 mars. ) 
Ordre au 2¢ corps de réserve de cava- 
lerie de quitter Torgau pour aller pren- 


DE NAPOLEON Ier, 


dre ses cantonnements & Francforlsupe 
Oder, 329. — Arrivée prochaine des 
Bavarois 4 Glogan, 329. — (25 mavy,) 
Le 3¢ corps recoit l'ordre d'établiv gee 
cantonnements sur I'Oder, 335, 
Marche des Saxons sur Pulawy ot Sane 
domir; prochaine réunion de l'armdée 
d'Italie (4° corps) & Glogau, 339, 340, 
— (26 mars.) Ordres relatifs aux mou 
vements de I'artillerie dans Ja direction 
de la Vistule, 343. — (30 mars.) 
L'Empereur indique 4 Berthier quolly 
devra étre au 1 mai la ligne deo bax 
taille de la Grande Armée sur la Vis- 
tule, 349 4 351, — (3 avril.) Projet 
de former un 9¢ corps ; quelle en sorail 
la composition, 355. — (10 avril.) 
Etablissemept des dépdts de la Grande 
Armée en Allemagne et sur la Vistula, 
365. — (22 avril.) Création d'un 
9° corps sous les ordres du maréchal 
Victor, 378. — (25 avril.) Prochaine 
arrivée des ducs de Reggio et d'Elchin« 
gen sur la Vistule, 387. — (30 avril,) 
Mouvements particls du 2° corps, 389, 
— Formation d'un 10¢ corps sous lo 
commandement de Macdonald, 390, — 
Date fixée pour le mouvement du 
4© corps, 392, — (1** mai.) Instruc- 
tions concernant les dépéts de la Grande 
Armée, 393. — (3 mai.) Il sera formé 
une 4¢ division de la réserve, 394. — 
(17 mai.) Ordre de diriger sur leurs 
corps respectifs les conscrits des divers 
dépéts de la Grande Armée, 405, — 
(18 mai.) Organisation de la réserve 
de la Grande Armée , 406. — (20 mai.} 
Dispositions pour !’armement de la lé- 
gion de la Vistule, 411. — (21 mai.) 
Mouvement de troupes de Glogau sur 
Posen, 413. — (23 mai.) Positions 
que doivent occuper, sur Ja Vistule, 
les 4° et 5¢ corps, afin d'assurer leur 
approvisionnement , 425. — (26 mai.) 
Ouverture prochaine de la campagne ; 
quarliers généraux assignés aux com- 
mandants des divers corps; ordres re- 
latifs aux manutentions et subsistances 
433. — Dispositions preserites en vue 
du mouvement a opérer par les 5°, 7¢ 
et 8° corps; ponts a jeler sur divers 
points, 435. — (28 mai.) Organisa- 
tion de la 7 division, 448. — 
(1¢* juin.) Distribution en Prusse et sur 
les cétes de Ja Baltique de la réserve de 
la Grande Armée; Augereau est chargé 





— aoe 








TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 569 


de la commander, 452 4 456. — 
(4 juin.) Mesures concernant Torgani- 
sation du service de l'intendant général 
et du payeur de la Grande Armée, 465. 
— (5 juin, ) Ordre de transférer le grand 
quartier général & Osterode, 468. — 
Le roi Jéréme est chargé de faire sur 
Ja Volhynie un mouvement simulé, ala 
faveur duquel l'Empereur débordera l'en- 
nemi sur son extréme droite , passera le 
Niemen et enlévera Vilna; tous les 
dépdis de l'armée seront réunis dans 
Modlin, 469. — (6 juin.) Positions 
assignées au 4° corps; itinéraire (racé 
aux divisions de Ney, Oudinot et Da- 
vout, 473. — (10 juin.) Une partie 
de Ia Grande Armée regoit I'ordre de 
marcher en avant sur Schippenbeil , 
Bartenstein , lusterburg et Gumbinnen, 
478. — Nouvelles positions 4 prendre 
par les 3¢, 4°, 32, Ge, 7e et Se corps ; 
toutes les maneuvres doivent tendre a 
pouvoir tomber sur la droite de l'en- 
nemi, au cas ow il ferait un. mouve- 
ment offensif; s'il demeure immobile, 
Faile gauche de la Grande Armée, aprés 
avoir passé le Niemen, débouchera sur 
le flanc des Russes, tandis que Iaile 
droite, sans trop s’avancer, exécutera, 
de son cédlé, une diversion calculée, 
480. — Réunion du corps de Gouvion- 
Saint-Cyr (6°) 4 Ortelsburg; I'Empe- 
reur insiste sur les mesures que le vice- 
roi doit prendre afin de pouvoir fondre, 
a occasion, sur Ie flanc droit des 
Russes; en résumé, toutes les opéra~ 
tions de la Grande Armée doivent avoir 
pour objet de faire avancer I'aile gauche 
par un mouvement débordant au dela 
du Niemen; quant a la droite, elle se 
tiendra liée avec la gauche, au moyen 
du centre maneuvrant sur la ligne de 
Thorn et de la basse Vistule, et elle 
couvrira Varsovie en s'appuyant a la 
Narew ; puis, lorsque le reste de l'armée 
aura franchi le Niemen inférieur, toute 
Ja droite se portera, selon I’événement, 
sur Grodno ou Bialystok, 480. — 
(11 juin.) Le roi Jéréme est chargé de 
suivre pas a pas le corps de Bagralion, 
qui semble vouloir, en s’avancant sur 
Brzesc, s'opposer au passage du Niemen 
et couvrir Vilna; en serrant de prés les 
Russes, de quelque cété qu’ils se diri- 
gent, et en demeurant appuyée au corps 
du vice-roi, I'aile droite de la Grande 


Armée ne court aucun risque et peut , 
au besoin, se réfugier dans le camp 
retranché de Modlin et sur la Vistule , 
484. — Instructions dans le méme sens 
au vice-roi; IEmpereur espere, pendant 
ce mouvement de Bagration, pouvoir 
franchir le Niemen et déboucher sur les 
derriéres de l’ennemi , 485 .— (13 juin.) 
Quartiers généraux assignés aux divers 
corps de cavalerie ; distribution des com- 
mandements, 488.— (14 juin.) Ordre 
au major général d’organiser définitive- 
ment tous Jes services sur les derriéres 
de l’armée : hépitaux, magasins, postes, 
police; détermination des points par ot 
passera la ligne militaire de communi- 
cation avec la France , 489.— (15 juin, ) 
Intention de I'Empereur de passer le 
Niemen entre Kovno et Olitta; pendant 
ce temps, le roi de Westphalie filerait 
le long de Ia Narew jusqu’d Bialystok 
pour suivre Bagration , 496. — Le plan 
de Napoléon est de chercher 4 séparer 
le corps de Bagration du reste de l'ar- 
mée russe, 498. — Ordre a Davout 
de réunir ses forces & Wilkowyszki ; 
imminence d'une bataille sur ce point , 
499. — (16 juin.) Détermination des 
routes & suivre par l'armée entre la 
Vistule et. le Niemen; points par les- 
quels auront lieu les communications 
avec Varsovie et Danzig, et celles entre 
Keenigsherg et Tilsit , 504. — (20 juin. ) 
Dispositions prescrites pour favoriser 
l'établissement des ponts sur le Niemen, 
514. — Ordres relatifs aux mouve- 
ments en avant des 4°, 5¢, 6&, 7¢ et 
8° corps, 514. — Envoi aux divers 
corps d'ingénieurs géographes chargés 
de faire le croquis des positions quils 
occupent, 516. — Le major général 
expédiera des équipages de pont sur 
Kovno et Maryampol, pour y jeter des 
ponts sur le Niemen, 517. — Prochain 
mouvement offensif de I’aile gauche en 
Courlande et sur Vilna, 518. — Le 
point principal du passage sera Kovno; 
un second pont principal sera jeté a 
Preny, 520. — Bulletin de la Grande 
Armée; énumération des événements 
qui ont amené la concentration de huit 
corps d'armée sur le Niemen, 521. — 
(21 juin.) Ordres dictés au major 
général en vue du passage, 522, — 
(22 juin.) Marche du 2° corps de la 
Garde sur Kovno, 526. — (22 juin.) 


570 CORRESPONDANCE 


Ordre de communiquer aux divers corps 
Je manifeste de Napoléon a la Grande 
Armée; des proclamations particulitres 
seront faites aux Prussiens et aux Autri- 
chiens, 527. — Batteries 4 mettre en 
position pour protéger le passage du 
Niemen, 527. — Proclamation a Ja 
Grande Armée, 528. — Ordre pour 
l'armée ; institution de commissions pré- 
votales chargées de punir les marau- 
deurs; tous les soldats isolés seront 
arrétés aux postes ou passages de I’ Oder 
et de la Vistule, et seront formés en 
compagnies , 529, 531. — (23 juin.) 
Ordre pour le passage du Niemen; 
trois ponts de bateaux seront jetés au- 
dessus de Kovno par le général Eblé , 
avec le concours de la division Morand ; 
le corps du prince d'Eckmihl franchira 
le premier le fleuve; un quatriéme pont 
sera placé en réserve sur les hauteurs 
d’Alexota, pour étre jeté plus tard en 
cet endroit, 531, 535. — (24 juin.) 
Ordre au 2* corps de franchir le Nie- 
men, 535. — (25 juin.) Le 2° corps 
maneuvrera de facon 4 opérer sa jonc- 
tion avec le 10°; I'Empereur a le projet 
de déloger de Keidany le prince de 
Wittgenstein, s'il occupe encore cette 
position , 537. — La marche sur Vilna 
est ajournée jusqu’a l’arrivée du vice= 
roi; l’essentiel, en attendant, est de 
s'assurer complétement de la rive gav- 
che de la Viliya, 538. — Date présu- 
mée 4 laquelle le prince Eugéne pourra 
franchir Je Niemen, 540. — Ordre a 
Eblé de construire deux ponts de pilotis 
sur la Viliya et un pont de radeaux sur 
le Niemen, 540: — (26 juin.) Un 
pont sera jeté 4 Piloni pour le passage 
de l’armée d'Italie, 542. — Ordre au 
major général de réduire le nombre des 
gendarmes dans chaque corps de la 
Grande Armée; ils doivent servir uni- 
quement pour la police, et non pour 
Tescorte des bagages , 542. — Position 
respective des armées russe et frangaise 
a quelques lieues de Vilna; force des 
corps ennemis; ordre 4 Oudinot de 
marcher contre Wittgenstein, 544, 
545. — (29 juin.) Avis au roi Jérémeé 
de l’occupation de Vilna, 546. 
(30 juin.) Rencontre des corps de 
Wittgenstein et d’Oudinot & Vilkomir ; 
les Russes, battus, se replient sur Di- 
nabourg ; marche paralléle de Ney et 


DE NAPOLEON fer, 


du duc de Reggio, 547. — Mowurot & 
prendre en vue du siége do Riga, $40, _ 

Granosgan (Baron), général do division, 
487, 505, 537, 541. 

Grawert , lieutenant général prosslen, 
commandant les troupes prussiennoe 
adjointes au 10¢ corps de la Grande At« 
mée, 338, 374, 467, 492. 

Guenter (Comte) , général de division com= 
mandant le corps d’observation de I'Ilalio 
méridionale, 346, 404, 420, 4@4, 

Gnovcuy (Comte ve), général de division , 
327, 539. 

Guviw (Comte), général de division, A la 
Grande Armée, 183, 243,244, 27, 
316, 545. 

Guerng (Administration dela). — (12 no» 
vembre 1811.) Observations sur la mau« 
vaise qualité des fournitures d’habillo- 
ment faites 4 l’armée ; ordre de mioux 
accueillir, 4 cet égard, les plaintes dew 
régiments, qui doivent avoir la latitude 
de refuser le mauvais drap; comparai= 
son, sous le rapport de I’habillement , 
des troupes frangaises avec celles du 
grand-duché de Berg, 11. — (14 no« 
vembre. ) Ordre 4 Clarke au sujet de 
dilapidations dans les fournitures d'ha~ 
billement ; responsabilité 4 imposer do« 
rénavant aux majors, 17. —(9 décem= 
bre.) De quel drap devront étre habillds 
les Pupilles de la Garde, 59.—(20 dé» 
cembre.) Question 4 Lacuée touchant 
les mesures & prendre contre les four= 
nisseurs de mauvaise foi, 96.— (26 dé« 
cembre.) Le comte de Cessac avisera 
aux moyens d’assarer |'approvisionne- 
ment de Barcelone, 112. —II s’enten- 
dra avec le ministre de la marine pour 
compléter celui de Corfou, 113, 114, 
— (29 décembre.) Instructions au 
comte de Cessac sur les mesures A 
concerter avec une compagnie de com- 
merce pour le transport des munilions 
de bouche nécessaires aux armées d’Es- 
pagne et de la Vistule, 125 4 129, — 
Ordre pour la construction 4 Anvers et 
a Venise de voitures de transports mili- 
taires, 130.— (2 janvier 1812.) Ordre 
a Lacuée d'établir le personnel d’admi- 
nistration de la Grande Armée, 151.— 
(4 janvier.) Question relative a l’espéce 
de voiture de transport qu'il convient 
d’adopter pour la prochaine campagne 
en Russie, 157. — (6 janvier.) Utilité 
d’employer des beeufs, outre les chevaux, 





TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 571 


pour I'attelage des voitures de trans- 
port, 160. — (13 janvier. ) Supplé- 
ment de crédit accordé a l'administration 
de la guerre pour achat d’approvision- 
nements, 165, — (24 janvier.) Instruc- 
tions 4 Lacuée sur l'organisation générale 
des équipages militaires de la Grande 
Armée, 184, — (29 janvier.) Pres- 
criptions relatives au mode de construc- 
tion des voitures de nouveau modeéle , 
196. — (30 janvier.) Observations sur 
Tétat des fournitures de J’ile d’Oleron, 
198. — (le février,) Fonds affectés a 
Fachat de bidons et gamelles pour les 
régiments de la Grande Armée, 200. 
— (4 février.) Ordre au général La- 
cuée de faire une levée de chevaux par 
réquisition, 205. — (13 février.) In- 
structions concernant les équipages mi- 
litaires des divers corps de la Grande 
Armée, 223, — (19 février.) Questions 
a Bessiéres relativement & Porganisation 
des équipages de la Garde, 241. — 
(23 fevrier. ) Observation sur le retard 
apporté dans la mise en mouvement 
des transports de la Grande Armée, 251. 
— Ordre au prince de Neuchatel rela- 
tivement au major inspecteur des équi- 
pages militaires, 251. — (27 février. ) 
Instructions 4 Lacuée au sujet des re- 
montes a faire en Allemagne, 256. — 
(1° mars. ) Ordres concernant le méme 
objet au major général de la Grande 
Armée, 272. —(7 mars. ) Mesures a 
prendre pour compléter les remontes 
de cavalerie, 290. — Dispositions pour 
approvisionner Ja Grande Armée d’effets 
d'habillement et d’ambulance , 291. — 


Le major général hatera le mouvement 
des équipages militaires de la Grande 
Armée ; prescriptions touchant les cais- 
sons du nouveau modéle, 293, — 
(14 mars. ) Enquéte preserite sur quel- 
gues malversations dans |’administration 
du régiment de la Méditerranée, 310.— 
(16 mars. ) Instructions sur les services 
administratifs de la Grande Armée: re- 
monte, personnel, hdpitaux, équipe- 
ment et fournitures d’habillement, ap- 
provisionnements, service des postes et 
des estafettes, 319. — (17 mars.) 
Ordre au comte de Cessac d'organiser 
Péquipement du premier ban de la garde 
nationale , 326. — (28 mars.) Obser- 
vations relatives anx fournitures de che~ 
vaux pour la remonte de la Grande 
Armée , 345. — (8 avril. ) Explications 
concernant les divers modéles de cais- 
sons & employer dans la prochaine 
campagne, 359. — (30 avril.) Ré- 
ponse a un rapport du comte de Cessac 
sur ce sujet, 388. —(1¢ juin. ) Ordre 
d’équiper les soldats des régiments de 
la Vistule restés au dépdt de Sedan, 
452. — (21 juin.) Observations con- 
cernant une négligence d’un ordonna- 
teur 4 la Grande Armée, 523. 

Gutttemivot (Baron), général de brigade, 
136. 

Gurrroy (Baron), général de brigade, 102, 
365. 

Gvvox (Baron) , général de brigade , 434, 
460. 3 

Guyot (Baron), général de division, com- 
mandant les chasseurs 4 cheval de la 
garde , 188, 215. 


H 


Haxe, colonel prussien, chargé du mi- 
nistére de la guerre a Berlin, 369. 
Hanpenperc (Baron vz), chancelier d'Etat 
en Prusse, 368, 452. 

Havrrout (D’), capitaine du génie, offi- 
cier d’ordonnance de |'Empereur. — 
(23 janvier 1812.) Mission confiée a 
cet officier : il ira inspecter 4 Metz, a 
Sampigny et & Mayence le personnel, le 
matériel et les attelages de l'artillerie de 
la réserve de la garde , 252.—(21 mai.) 
D’Hautpoul est chargé d’aller reconnattre 
différents points de la frontiére russe, 
416. — (20 juin.) Ordre a d'Haat- 
poul de parcourir les hords du Niemen, 


de Kovno 4 Preny, en étudiant spécia- 
Jement lendroit ot le fleuve fait un 
coude, 519. 

Haxo (Baron) , général de brigade, 512. 

Hévouviite ( Comte p’) , sénateur, général 
de division, 285 , 289. 

Hercuen, 540. 

Hetcoranp, fle de la mer du Nord, 203. 

Hevupeter, général de division, 407, 408, 
427, 483. 

Hit, général anglais, en Espagne, 39, 
228, 234, 

Hocenpore (Comte), général de division , 
aide de camp de |'Kmpereur, 467, 473, 
476, 505. 


572 CORRESPONDANCE 


Hontanoz. — (18 décembre 1811.) 
L'inscription maritime francaise sera 
établie en Hollande; les navires de com- 
merce hollandais fourniront , au besoin, 
leurs matelots 4l’escadre du Texel, 91. 
— (16 mars 1812.) Ordre d'augmen- 
ter les compagnies départementales char- 


DE NAPOLEON F. 


général Molitor au sujet des troupes 
destinées a garder la Hollande, 328, 
— (25 avril.) Nouvelles instructions 
pour Molitor; importance qu'il doit 
attacher a la place de Naardem; mission 
confiée au général Chambarlhac , 386. 


Héprravx amuitairgs. V. Santé (Service de), 


gées de la défense de la Hollande, 313. Hummer (L’) , baron, général de division, 


— (20 mars.) Instructions pour le 


Intyniennes (Provinces). — (28 décembre 
1811.) Observations sur des rapports 
de Mollien concernant les finances des 
provinces Illyriennes; inexactitudes et 
fautes & y redresser; crilique des 
comptes de l'intendant Chabrol ; total 
des sommes affectées a ]'Illyrie en 1811; 
explications tendant 4 démontrer que ce 
pays n’a pas de budget proprement dit, 
119. 

Inscription mariting. V. Conscription. 

Iystauction PupLigus. — (12 novembre 
1811.) Ordre d’établir 4 Wesel une 
école secondaire francaise et des écoles 
primaires pour I'enseignement du fran- 
¢ais, 3. — (20 novembre.) Question a 
Montlalivet au sujet du lycée de Lyon, 
23. — (23 novembre.) Ordre d’éloi- 
gner des séminaires tous les Sulpiciens, 
29. — (30 novembre.) Observation 
relative au lycée de Marseille, 40. — 
(16 décembre.) Ordre concernant le 
régime d’alimentation dans les lycées de 
Paris, 83. 

Istne (Duc pv’). V. Bessitres. 

Irauiz. — (18 novembre 1811.) Ordre 
au vice-roi pour Ja répression du _bri- 
gandage dans les Htats romains , 21.— 
(27 décembre.) Observations sur la 
question des monnaies en Italie ; oppor- 
tunité d’ajourner encore la réduction 
an systtme décimal ; raisons économi- 


260, 314, 439, 447. 


ques et politiques & l’appui de cette 
considération, 119. — (13 janvier 
1812.) Ordre au prince Eugene derégler, 
avant son départ, l’organisation militaire 
du royaumed Ilalie, 172.—(28 janvier. ) 
Prescriptions relatives 4 l'armement des 
places italiennes, 194. — (29 féurier. ) 
Forces qui devront rester en Italie pour 
ss défense et le maintien de la tranquil- 
lité; garnisons a- mettre 4 Palmanova , 
Osoppo, Venise, Mantoue, Ancéne, ete. ; 
mesures a prendre pour que ces troupes 
puissent, au hesoin, se porter sur tous 
Jes points de la Péninsule, 270. — 
(28 mars.) Observations concernant les 
troupes destinées a la garde de I'ltalie 
pendant la campagne qui va s’ouvrir; 
génévaux chargés de les commander ; 
gouvernement civil du pays; le duc de 
Lodi aura la présidence du conseil des 
ministres, 346. — (30 avril.) Ordre 
de dissiper des rassemblements de dé- 
serteurs et de contrebandiers dans les 
montagnes de la Vénélie, 393. — 
(23 mai.) Mesures 4 prendre pour assu- 
rer la défense des divers points de J'Ita- 
lie que les Anglais pourraient menacer ; 
dénombrement des forces disponibles 
dans cette vue, 420, 423. —(27 mai.) 
Instructions sur le méme sujet au mi- 
nistrede la guerre, 437. V. Deux-Siciuus, 
Toscane. 


Jantoxowsxt (Prince), 443. 

Jacop, capitaine de vaisseau, 199, 

Jacquemmnor, commissaire ordonnateur des 
guerres , 464. 

Jacqunor (Baron) , général de brigade, a 
la Grande Armée, 104, 152, 183. 
Jindue Naportoy, roi de Westphalie. — 
(9 décembre 1811.) Mot amical a Jé- 
réme 4 propos de V'incendie du chatean 


de Cassel ; question concernant les forces 
mililaires dont le roi de Westphalie 
pourrait disposer pour l’occupation de 
la Silésie, 61. — (16 mars 1812.) Le 
roi Jéréme, a l’ouverture des hostilités , 
prendra le commandement de Taile 
droite de la Grande Armée, composée 
des 5¢, 7¢ et 8¢ corps , et s’occupera de 
couvrir Varsovie, 314, — (25 mars.) 


TABLE AN 


Ordre au roi de Westphalie de se rendre 
a Glogau,, puis 4 Kalisz; au cas ot les 
Rasses attaqueraient le Grand-Duché , il 
devrait sur-le-champ se porter & Varso- 
vie, 339. — (10 avril.) Arrivée pro- 
chaine du roi Jéréme a Kalisz; il fera, 
dans le plus grand secret, une recon- 
naissance militaire a Cracovie et a San- 
domir, 366. — (30 avril.) Le roi 
Jéréme & Varsovie , 392. — (17 mai.) 
Défense au roi de Westphalie de jeter 
des ponts sur la Vistule ; ce prince vé- 
rifiera I'état des approvisionzements 
dans les places polonaises, 405. — 
(21 mai.) Ordres a Jéréme dans le méme 
sens, 414. — (26 mai. ) Mouvement 
prescrit au roi de Westphalie, 435. — 
(1e juin, ) Il est chargé de reconnailre 
divers points dela frontiére russe, 463. 
-— (5 juin.) Instructions relatives au 
plan d’opérations que le roi Jéréme exé- 
cutera; son corps est destiné a défendre 
Varsovie; Pultusk sera son quartier gé- 
néral, 469. — (11 juin.) Ordre a 
Jéréme de serrer de prés le corps de 
Bagration, dans Je cas ou il se dirige- 
rait sur Brzesc et Grodno pour essayer 
de couvrir Vilna et de s’opposer au pas- 
sage du Niemen; quels que soient les 
mouvements du général russe , le roi de 
Westphalie doit le suivre de position en 
posilion , tout en gardant sa ligne d'o- 
pérations sur Modlin et en se tenant uni 
avec le corps du vice-roi, 484. — 
(15 juin. ) Le roi Jérdme transportera, 
le 20, son quartier général a Nowogrod, 
496. — (21 juin.) Ordre 4 ce prince 
de prendre position sur Auguslowo, 525. 
— (29 juin.) Il marchera contre Ba-~ 
gration du cété d’'Ochmiana, 546. — 
(30 juin, ) Conjecture de Napoléon sur 
Yentrée de Jéréme & Grodno, 550. 

V. Granpe Anwes, 


Ketteruann, duc de Valmy, maréchal, 382. 

Ketuermaxn (Comte), général de division , 
4 la réserve de cavalerie, 164, 327, 
332, 362. 

Kinoguan, général! commandant les régi- 
ments espagnols en France, 304. 

Kueist, général prussien , 390, 467, 473. 

Kotowsk ( Prince), ministre de Russie en 
Sardaigne, 12. 


ALYTIQUE. 573 


Jeux (Administration des), — (20 novem- 
bre 1811.) Projet d’une réforme dans 
T’administration des jeux de Paris; éva- 
luation des bénéfices de cette banque; 
lEmperear désirerait trouver une com- 
binaison pour appliquer les profits soit 
aux hépitaux, soit 4 Ja réserve en blé 
de Paris, 24. 

Joacuim Napouton, roi de Naples, com- 
mandant Ja cavalerie de la Grande Ar- 
mée, — (10 juin 1812.) Ordre 4 Mu- 
rat de se rendre 4 Gumbinnen avec 
V’état-major de la cavalerie, 479. — 
(13 juin.) Il portera son quartier gé- 
néral 4 Wilkowyszki, 488. — (24 juin. ) 
Le roi de Naples, aprés avoir franchi le 
Niemen, fera battre le pays entre ce 
flenve et la Viliya et reconnaitre la route 
de Skorouli a Jijmory, 535. — (25 juin.) 
Instructions 4 ce prince sur la maniére 
dont la cavalerie doit opérer les recon- 
naissances; Murat se concertera avec 
Davout pour choisir une bonne position 
sur la Viliya, 538. — (29 mai.) Ordre 
4 Murat de chasser l'ennemi de Niemen-~ 
tchine, 545. V. Gnanpe Anke, Siciue. 

Jomwvitte, commissaire ordonnateur des 
guerres , 507. 

Josepa Napouton, roi d’Espagne. — (16 
mars 1812.) L'Empereur confére a Jo- 
seph le commandement en chef de toutes 
ses armées en Espagne, 313. 

Jourrroy (Baron), général de brigade, 48. 

Jourvan, duc de Fleurus, maréchal. — 
(16 mars 1812.) Jourdan est nommé 
chef d’état-major des armées frangaises 
en Espagne , 313. V. Espagne (Opéra- 
tions en). 

Juxor, duc d’Abrantés, commandant le 
corps d’observation d'Italie (4° corps de 
la Grande Armée), sous les ordres du 
vice-roi, 213, 219, 299, 327, 362, 
363. V. Granpg Anatie. 


K 


Konopxa, général de brigade dans la Garde, 
103, 188. 

Korzesug, écrivain allemand, 44, 45. 

Kouraxine (Prince), ambassadeur de Rus- 
sie A Paris, 275. 

Krastysx1, colonel , commandant les che- 
vau-légers polonais de la Garde, 188. 

Kavusemank (Baron pe), ministre de Prusse 
a Paris, 370, 384. V. Prussz. 


57% CORRESPONDANCE 


DE NAPOLEON Ie, 


L 


Laciripg (Comte pg), grand chancelier de. 
la Légion d’honneur, 12. 

Lacukée, comte de Cessac, général de divi- 
sion, ministre directeur de !’administra- 
tion de Ja guerre. V. Guerre (Adminis- 
tration de la). 

Lacrance, général de division, 363, 427, 
483. 

Lacraxce, adjudant-commandant, 296, 
406, 411, 453, 501. 

Lanusse (Baron), général de brigade, ad- 
judant général dans la Garde, 214. 
Laptaxe (Baron), général de brigade, 377. 

La Rinorsidee. V. Risorsitne (La). 

Larour-Mavsourc, comte de Fay, sénateur, 
général de division, 285, 332, 505. 

Lauaiston (Law pg), comte, général de 
division, ambassadeur de France a 
Saint-Pétersbourg. V. Russi, 

Lrvrun, duc de Plaisance, prince, lieute- 
nant général de I'Empereur en Hol- 
lande, 142, 402. V. Houianne. 

Lergsyrz, duc de Danzig, maréchal. — 
(3 avril 1812.) L’Empereur projette de 
confier 4 ce maréchal un des deux com- 
mandements de la Garde, 355. 
(10 avril.) Le duc de Danzig regoit le 
commandement de la vieille Garde, 366. 
— (13 juin.) Ordre 4 ce maréchal de 


diriger ses troupes sur Insterburg, 488, 
— (21 juin.) Il se portera, le 22, on 
avant de Wilkowyszki, 524. — (99 
juin.) Marche de Lefebvre sur Kono, 
526. V. Ganpe mpsaraus. 

Licron p'xonneur (Ordre de la), 12. 

Lecraxp (Comte), général de division, A 
la Grande Armée, 107, 249, 307, 
315, 512, 535, 537. 

Leric (Baron), général de brigade, 188, 

Lerin (Baron), général de brigade, 48, 
389, 473. ; 

Lussers, consul général de France 4 Saint= 
Pétersbourg, 117. 

Letort, colonel, major dans la Garde, 
188. 

Lerrass pz Napottoy. —- (25 novembre 
1811.) Ordre au ministre de l’intérieur 
d’empécher Ja publication d’aucune let~ 
tre de Napoléon, vraie ou fausse, 35. 

Luénitign (Baron), général de brigade, 
105. 

Licexces. V. BLocus conTinenTaL. 

Lion , colonel , major dans la Garde, 188, 

Loni (Duc de). V. Menzt. 

Lorce (Baron), général de division, a la 
réserve de cavalerie, 332, 

Lonrio., armateur, 28. 

Lyon, ville de France, 23. 


M 


Macponatp, duc de Tarente, maréchal. — 
(30 avril 1812), Il est désigné pour le 
commandement du 10° corps de la 
Grande Armée, 389. — (13 juin.) 
Ordre 4 Macdonald d’occuper Tilsit et 
le pays vis-d-vis de Georgenburg , 487. 
— (16 juin.) Nouvelles instructions sur 
les positions que doit prendre le duc de 
Tarente, 505. — (19 juin.) Ce maré- 
chal ira reconnaitre , 4 Tilsil, l’empla- 
cement d'un pont a jeter sur le Niemen, 
511. — (24 juin.) Ordre 4 Macdonald 
de passer le fleuve et d’opérer sa jonc- 
tion avec le duc de Reggio, 536. — 
(25 juin.) Le duc de Tarente s'avancera 
rapidement sur Rossieny, 539. — (30 
juin.) Eventualité d'un mouvement de 
Macdonald sur Mitau, 549. V. Granpr 
Aruke. 

Manigz, colonel, 242. 

Mamanvoz (De), ministre plénipotentiaire 
de la Confédération helvétique a Paris, 5, 


Matson (Baron), général de brigade, 107. 

Manoracturss. V. Commence. 

Marcuaxo (Comte), général de division , 
329, 339. 

Maret, duc de Bassano, ministre des rela- 
tions extérieures. VU. AncteTsrre, Avu- 
TRICHR, Danemark, Prusse, Russie, 
Subvs, et la Liste des personnes auxquelles 
les letires sont adresstes, p. 588. 

Mancanoy (Baron), général de brigade, 
103. 

Manin. (Service général et constructions. ) 
— (14 novembre 1811.) Etablisse- 
ments de construction navale de Génes 
et de Ja Spezia; conditions auxquelles 
l'Empereur consent a conserver et méme 
a développer les travaux maritimes com- 
mencés a Génes; raison politique 4 
Yappui de cette intention, 13. — Ob- 
servations sur, }'utilité de ménager des 
abris dans les golfes de Juan et de Vil- 
lefranche aux vaisseaux sortant de Tou- 





TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 575 


lon, 13. — (15 novembre. ) Decrés 
arrétera l’ordre des matiéres qui seront 
traitées dans divers conseils d'adminis- 
tration de la marine, 18. — (16 no- 
vembre. ) Importance que IEmpereur 
altache & la flottille de Boulogne, qui 
doit étre une menace permanente contre 
l’Angleterre, 19. — (20 novembre. ) 
Usage a faire des mortiers a la Villan- 
troys pour protéger contre les Anglais 
les rades et mouillages des cdtes de 
l'Ouest, 25, 26. — Le ministre de la 
marine délerminera Jes points ou le 
nouvel engin serait utilement placé, 27. 
— (21 novembre.) Ressources a tirer, 
pour les constructions navales, de l’ex- 
ploitation des foréts des Alpes mariti-~ 
mes, 29. — (23 novembre. ) Situation 
irréguliére du garde-magasin de la ma~- 
rine i Anvers; insuffisance du contrdéle 
4 son égard ; le ministre de Ja marine 
fera cesser cet abus, 33. — (29 no- 
vembre.) Ordre relatif @ Ja nourriture 
des matelots de Brest; question concer- 
naut les travaux d'un chantier de caré- 
nage 4 Marseille, 40. — (4 décembre. ) 
Projet de réorganisation des canonniers 
dela marine; nécessilé d’améliorer leur 
instrnetion ; défectuosilé du tir en usage, 
46. — (6 décembre. ) Ressources im- 
menses offertes & la construction navale 
par les foréts de l'Empire; évaluation 
du nombre de vaisseaux qu'on pourrait 
en tirer ; apergu particulier concernant 
la forét de Compiégne; conséquences 
qui résultent des calculs faits au sujet 
des coupes possibles, 56, 58.—(9 dé- 
cembre, ) Calcul 4 faire touchant le prix 
de transport, jusqu’a Anvers, des hois 
de Compiégne et de Fontainebleau, 60, 
— (12 décembre. ) Inutilité d’établir 
un atelier de construction 4 Trieste, 70. 
— (13 décembre.) Ordre 4 Decrés de 
déterminer la circonscription des bassins 
qui doivent approvisionner en bois les 
différents ports; coupes provenant des 
foréts du domaine; quantité de pieds 
cubes nécessaires 4 la marine jusqu’a la 
fin de 1815; le conseil de marine exa- 
minera si l'on peut construire des vais- 
seaux de ligne dans la Loire, 71 ,'73. 
— (26 décembre. ) Disposition relative 
aux compagnies de ligne formant les 
garnisons de vaisseau, 114. — (27 dé- 
cembre.) Observations sur le prix de 
transport, jusqu’d Anvers, des bois de 


la forét de Compiégne; rabais possible 
sur ce point, 118.— (15 janvier 1812.) 
Note concernant les coupes de bois pour 
la marine; nécessité d'employer, aprés 
le martelage , le systéme d’adjudication, 
175. — (29 février.) Instructions 4 
Decrés sur l'organisation des régiments 
de Vartillerie de marine; avantages du 
systeme qui consiste 4 placer un état- 
major et un dépdt d’artillerie dans cha- 
que grand port, 264. — (6 mars. ) 
Travaux a faire aux rades d’Anvers et 
de Flessingue, 286. — (21 mars.) 
L’Empereur insiste auprés de Decrés sur 
la question de savoir s'il serait possible 
de construire des vaisseaux de guerre & 
Yembouchure de Ja Loire, 330. — 
(26 mars.) Observations sur le méme 
sujet au ministre de la marine; études 
a faire , en conséquence, 4 Mindin et a 
Saint-Nazaire, 34]. — (27 mai.) Uti- 
lité de construire au Vrische-Haff des 
batiments de guerre destinés a la dé- 
fense de ce lac et dela passe qui y con- 
duit, 440, — (19 juin.) Ordre con- 
cernant un mémoire sur Ja navigation , 
510. 


Marine. (Opérations et mesures de guerre. ) 


—(29 décembre 1811.) Résultat des son- 
dages fails dans tes eaux de Barcelone 
et de Tarragone; facilités offertes su 
mouillage des navires, 129, — (5 dé- 
cembre. ) Instructions concernant des 
expéditions navales a diriger, de Brest et 
de Nantes, sur l'ile de Java, 50. — 
(31 janvier 1812.) Ordres relatifs a 
l’organisation de l'escadre de la Gironde, 
199, — (4 février.) Plaintes de I'Em- 
pereur au sujet d'une fausse maneuvre 
de l'escadre de Toulon dans une de ses 
sorties, 206. — (8 février. ) Disposi- 
tions concernant les flottilles de l’Es- 
caut, de Boulogne et de Cherbourg; 
mesures prises pour la défense de ces 
trois points; nécessité de se ménager 
un refuge dans I’Elbe en cas de guerre, 
209. — (18 février.) Ordre au vice- 
amiral Missiessy de descendre !’Escaut 
avec son escadre et de multiplier les re- 
connaissances en dehors des passes; son 
commandement s'étendra, du nord au 
sud, depuis Brielle jusqu’au canal de 
l'Ecluse; il sera affecté a la flotte de 
I'Escaut 92 chaloupes canonniéres, par- 
tagées en trois divisions : division de 
flottille de I'Escaut et de la défense des 


576 
fles Walcheren et Schouwen; division 
de la Meuse et de la défense des tles 
Schouwen et Goeree; division de flot- 
lille de Vescadre, 236 a 240. 
(3 mars,.) Prise du vaisseau le Rivoli 
par les Anglais; instructions données , 
& cette occasion, au ministre de la 
guerre, 276. — L'Empereur attribue & 
la négligence du prince Eugéne la ca- 
tastrophe du Rivoli; représertations 
qu'il lui adresse & ce sujet, 281. — 
Plusieurs batiments se tiendront préts a 
prendre la mer a Malamocco ; Napoléon 
enverra, pour les protéger dans leur 
marche sur. Ancéne, une division de 
vaisseaux, 281. — (10 mars.) Ordre 
au ministre de la marine d’approfondir 
Yaffaire du Rivoli; |’Empereur désire 
savoir si cet événement doit étre imputé 
a un acte de désobéissance ou. de legé- 
reté de l'amiral Villaret , 297. 
(16 juin.) Enquéte 4 faire sur la perte 
de deux frégates prés de Lorient elsur la 
conduite du commandant de la Danaé, 
502. 

Marine riuviace. — (14 mars 1812.) 

» Dispositions pour l'envoi de plusieurs 
bataillons de flottille 4 la suite de la 
Grande Armée, 309. — (23 mai.) 
Organisation d'un service de transport 
fluvial de la Grande Armée ; systéme de 
navigation intérieure du Frische-Haff , 
425. — (15 juin.) Ordre au 17¢ ba- 
taillon d’équipage de flottille de se ren- 
dre de Danzig & Kenigsherg; mesures 
4 prendre pour la défense de la passe 
de Pillan et Ja navigation des lacs. ou- 
verts du Niemen et de la Pregel, 491. 
— Envoi d’un officier chargé de recon- 
naftre, en vue du transport de I’équi- 
page de siége, la navigation de Labiau 
a Tapiau et les communications avec le 
Niemen par le canal de Frédéric et le 
Curische-Haff, 495. — (17 juin. ) 
Travaux a faire pour améliorer le canal 
de Bromberg et accélérer la navigation 
de la Netze et de la Warta; commission 
nommée a cei effet; fonds mis & sa dis- 
position , 507. 

Marwont, duc de Raguse, maréchal, com- 
méndant lT'armée de Portugal. 
(19 novembre 1811.) Ordre 4 Mar- 
mont de secourir Je maréchal Suchet , 
en vue de la prise de Valence, 2], 22. 
— (11 février 1812.) Instructions 
pour le duc de Raguse; il fera ses dis- 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON er. 


positions pour réoccuper les Asturios, 
et placera son quartier général & Sala» 
manque, 220, — (18 février.) Obser« 
vations & Marmont sur la mauvaise 
direction qu'il a donnée & la quoerre; 
aprés avoir manqué I'occasion de r= 
prendre Ciudad-Rodrigo sur les Anglais, 
il doit, de Salamanque, tenir I'ennemi 
sur le qui-vive, et tout préparer pour 
un nouveau mouvement offensif au mois 
de mai; du succés de cetle opération 
dépend la conquéte du Portugal , 228 4 
235. — (21 février.) Instructions dang 
le méme sens 4 Marmont; il s’en tiendra 
au plan qui luia été prescrit ; ses forces 
seront concentrées autour de Salaman~ 
que, et, méme aprés une bataille per- 
due, son intérét lui défend d’évacuer 
les Asturies, 245. — (12 mars.) Nou- 
velles instructions & transmettre au dug 
de Raguse : tous ses efforts doivent 
tendre a tenir en échec, sur la rive 
droite du Tage, la plus grande partic 
des troupes anglaises, 306, V. Espacyy 
( Opérations en ). 

Manruscuswitz, général de brigade, 33, 
48. 

Marnicu (Maurice), comte, général de 
division , 356. 

Mutat, duc de Lodi, président du conseil 
des ministres du royaume d'Ilalie, 347, 
370, 404. 

Menpicité (Dépdts de). — (20 novembre 
1811.) Construction d'un dépdt de 
mendicité 4 Florence; rapport a faire 
sur ce sujet par le ministre de l'inté- 
rieur, 23. 

Menevat (Baron), matlre des requétes, 
secrétaire du portefeuille au cabinet de 
I'Empereur, 95. 

Mercy p’Arcenrgau (Comte), ministre de 
France 4 Munich, 385. 

Mente (Baron) , général de division, 407, 
Ald, 416. 

Merrernice - Winnesunc - Ocusennavsen 
(Prince pe), ministre d’Ktat et des 
conférences , président du Conseil d’Au- 
triche, 412. 

Meynarp, capitaine de vaisseau, 162. 

Micuaup (Baron), général de division , 
391, 429. 

Mina (Espoz y), chef de troupes insur- 
rectionnelles en Espagne, 22. 

Miottrs (Comte), général de division, 
président de la consulte de Rome, 421, 
422, 439, 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


Misstessy (Comte), vice-amiral, 211, 235. 

Mouror (Comte), général de division , 
226, 328, 386. 

Mo.tiex (Comte), ministre du trésor pu- 
blic. V. Trésor Pusiic. 

Mowrativer (Comte vz), ministre de l'in- 
térieur. V. Apamnisrration et la liste des 
personnes & qui les lettres sont adressées , 
p- 588. 

Moyrsrun (Comte vk), général de divi- 
sion, 188, 220, 327, 330, 339, 545 , 
550. 

Mowresquiou (Comtesse ps), gouvernante 
de Ja Maison des enfants de France, 
46, 208, 420, 499. 

Monturon. V. Batty pe Monrnion. 

Morano (Comte), général de division , ala 
Grande Armée, 243, 531, 532, 534, 
545, 550. 

Monto (Comte) , général de division dans 
l'armée westphalienne, 90, 114. 


577 


Monrtizr, duc de Trévise, maréchal. — 
(3 avril 1812.) Intention de I'Empereur 
de confier & Mortier un des comman- 
dements de la Garde, 355. — (9 juin.) 
Ordre au duc de Trévise de se rendre a 
Keenigsberg avec la 1'¢ division de la 
Garde, 477. — (19 juin.) Séjour de 
Mortier 4 Insterburg ; avant d’en partir 
avec la Garde, il se munira de vivres 
pour douze jours, 513. — (20 juin.) 
Ordre au duc de Trévise de partir pour 
Gumbinnen, 516. — (22 juin.) II 
portera son quartier général en avant de 
Pilwiszki, 526. 

Morarp, capitaine de vaisseau, 309. 

Mounren (Baron) , 398. 

Mountz (Baron), général de brigade, 
103, 104, 153. 

Munster, ville de Prusse, 78. 

Morar. V. Joacuia Napotion. 


N 


Nansouty (Comte pr), général de division, 
& la réserve de cavalerie, 41, 164, 
244, 545, 550. 

Narixs (Royaume de). V. Devx-Sicites. 

Napouton Jet, Empereur des Frangais , 
Roi d'Italie, Protecteur de la Confédé- 
ration du Rhin, Meédiateur de la Con- 
fédération helvétique. — (12 novembre 
1811.) Napoléon 4 Saint-Cloud, 1. — 
(2 décembre.) Son retour a Paris , 44. 
(6 janvier 1812.) Il se rend au palais 
de Saint-Cloud, et, le méme jour, re- 
vient & Paris, 158. — (13 janvier.) 
L'Empereur a Saint- Cloud, puis a 
Paris, 167. — (22 mars.) Allocutions 
aux dépulations des colléges électoraux 
de divers départements, 331. —(2 avril.) 
Napoléon a Saint-Cloud, 353. — 
(4 avril.) Il vient 4 Paris, puis rentre 
a Saint-Cloud, 358. — (17 avril.) 
Séjour a Paris, 371. — (18 avril.) Re- 
tour 4 Saint-Cloud, 373. — (19 avril.) 
Allocution & la députation du Mont- 
Tonnerre, 377. — (8 mai.) Allocution 
a la dépulation du département des 
Apennins, 403. — (11 mai.) L’Empe- 
reur 4 Mayence, 404. — (17 mai.) 
Son séjour a Dresde, 404. — (26 mai.) 
Réunion de souverains et de princes 
auprés de Napoléon, 433. — (31 mai.) 
L'Emperenr & Posen, 450, — (3 juin. ) 
Son séjour a Thorn, 463, — (5 juin.) 


XXII. 


Il annonce au roi Jéréme son départ 
pour Danzig, 471. — (7 juin.) Napo- 
Iéon 4 Danzig, 474. — (10 juin.) Il 
se prépare & gagner Koenigsberg ; ordre 
d'aceréditer le bruit qu'il se rendra 
ensuite 4 Varsovie, 479. — (13 juin.) 
Passage de I'Empereur 4 Keenigsherg , 
487. — (17 juin.) Son arrivée a In- 
sterburg, 507. — (19 juin.) Son pas- 
sage 4 Gumbinnen , 510.— (22 juin.) 
Napoléon a Wilkowyszki , 526.— Pro- 
clamation 4 la Grande Armée, 528. — 
(23 juin.) Ordre pour Ie passage du 
Niemen, daté du camp impérial de 
Naugardyszki , 531.—(24 juin. ) L’Em- 
pereur & Kovno, 535. — (29 juin.) 
Son séjour a Vilna, 545. 

Narsowne (Comte pz), général de division, 
aide de camp de I'Empereur, 368, 
388, 390. 

Narurauisation (Lettres de). — (12 fé- 
veier 1812.) Note dictée en conseil des 
ministres sur l’octroi de lettres de natu- 
ralisation aux Francais établis a 1’étran- 
ger; examen de divers cas cilés comme 
exemples, 222. 

Nessetrope (Comte pe), ministre des affai- 
res étrangéres de Russie, 82. V. Russts. 

Nev, duc d’Elchingen, maréchal. 
(14 janvier 1812.) Commandant le 
3¢ corps de Ja Grande Armée, 173.— 
(22 février.) Ordre & Ney de porter 


37 


578 CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON [er, 


son quartier général 4 Erfurt; il passera 
PElbe & Wittenberg , 247. — (16 mars. ) 
Le duc d’Elchingen se tiendra prét 4 se 
diriger, avec son corps, sur I'Oder, 
315. — (25 mars.) Ordre a Ney d’exé- 
cuter son mouvement , 335, — (21 mai.) 
Ce maréchal poussera Ja téte de son 
infanterie sur Osterode, 413.— (3 juin.) 
Le corps du duc d’Elchingen s'éche- 
lonnera depuis Strasburg jusqu’a Os- 
terode, 463. — (6 juin.) Ney recoit 
l'ordre de porter son quartier général a 
Gerdauen, 473. — (10 juin.) Il éva- 
cuera les places de Schippenbeil et 
Bartenstein, 478, — (15 juin.) Ordre 
au duc d'Elchingen de s’avancer jusqu’a 
Kalwarya, 496. — (16 juin.) Il rap- 


route tracée au 3° corps, U0, o« 
(20 juin.) Le duc d'Elchingen parting 
de Kalwarya pour Maryampol, $17, 
(21 juin.) I se portera d trois Houos 
en arriére de Preny , 524. — (25 Jobe 
Ordre 4 Ney de se porter sur Kormilo 
et de reconnattre le pays entre Ia Villya 
et le Niemen, 537. — Importance que 
Ney doit attacher 4 cette reconnalie 
sance des bords de la Viliya, 539, 
(26 juin.) Le duc d’Elchingen marchora 
dans la direction de Vilna, 544, 
(29 juin.) Ordre a Ney d’envoyor une 
reconnaissance sur Vilkomir, 545, <« 
(30 juin.) Il se mettra en communica« 
tion avec le duc de Reggio, 546, S47, 
V. Granpe Arnis. 


pellera les Wurtembergeois, qui ont Nisas, adjudant commandant, 111. 
fait un écart sur la Pregel, dans la Novrry (Baron) , général de brigade, 44, 


0 


Ocrrois. — (30 novembre 1811.) Ordre 
de diminuer une taxe d’octroi, 4 Mar- 
seille, 40. J 

Onvnano (Comte), général de brigade, 103, 
189, 332, 

Ossuon (D'), ministre plénipotentiaire de 
Suéde a Paris, 181. V. Suan. 

Orro (Comte), conseiller d’Etat, ambas- 
sadeur de France 4 Vienne, 93, 312, 
384. V. Aurricne. 

Oupinor, duc de Reggio, maréchal. — 
(10 janvier 1812.) Le duc de Reggic 
recoit le commandement du 2° corps 
d’observation de I'Elbe (2¢ de la Grande 
Armée), 163.— (22 février.) Ordre & 
Oudinot de mettre ses divisions en 
mouvement et de porter son quartier 
général 4 Magdeburg, 249.— (13 mars. ) 
Le duc de Reggio fera secrétement ses 
préparatifs pour quitter Magdeburg et 
se diriger sur Berlin , 307. — (16 mars. ) 
Ordres relatifs aux mouvements du 
corps d’Oudinot, 315. — (26 mars.) 
Au cas ot les Russes commenceraient 


énéral a Preussich-Eylau, 473. 
fis juin.) Pénurie du 2° corps sous le 
rapport des subsistances; observations 
a transmettre sur ce point au duc de 
Reggio; ce maréchal se transportera 
Wehlau pour suivre, de li, le mouvee 
ment de l'armée, 487. — (15 itt 
Ordre & Oudinot de s’avancer jusqu’ 
Gumbinnen , 496. — (20 juin.) Co 
maréchal dirigera en hate deux divisions 
entre Stallupehnen et Wirballen, 513, 
— (21 juin.) Il portera son quartier 
général & Pilwiszki, 524. — (21 juin,) 
Ordre 4 Oudinot de faire jeter son pont 
sur le Niemen et de franchir le fleuve , 
535.— (25 juin.) Passage de la Viliya 
par le duc de Reggio, 537. — Co 
maréchal manceuvrera sur Keidany ot 
Bobty pour faire sa jonction avec lo 
10° corps, 537. — (26 juin.) Ordre i 
Oudinot de marcher contre Wittgenstein, 
545. — (29 mai.) Rencontre du duc de 
Reggio et de Wittgenstein a Vilkomir ; re- 
traite des Russes, 547. V. Granpg Ante, 


les hostilités, le duc de Reggio passe- Outtaasoure (Baron nv’), général de bri- 


rait I'Oder a Schwedt, 343. — (6 juin. ) 


gade, 105. 


Ordre & Oudinot de porter son quartier Ouvanor, général russe, 547. 


P 


Patomsint, général de division, a l’armée 


Papove (Duc pr). V. Arricat. 
Payot (Baron) , général de brigade, 104, 
152, 243, 979, 533, 545. 


d'Espagne, 137, 312. 
Paravré, — (21 mai 1812.) L’Empereur 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


ordonne la translation du Pape de Sa- 
vone a Fontainebleau; motifs de cette 
mesure; précautions 4 prendre pour 
que Je souverain pontife effectue ce 
voyage a l’aise et en sireté; l'archevé- 
que d’Edesse sera chargé de l’accompa- 
guer, et on informera ce prélat des 
dangers que faisait courir au Saint-Pére 
la présence des Anglais devant Savone , 
417. 

Panroungaux (Comte), général de division, 
378, 382, 452, 483. 

Pauttre (Baron), général de brigade , 
106. 

Pitcus, — (25 novembre 1811.) Regle- 
ment 4 faire concernant Ja péche; né- 
cessité d’organiser un systéme de sur- 
veillance qui, sans géner les pécheurs, 
rende impossibles la contrebande et le 
passage des espions; droit d'embargo & 
confier aux officiers de grade supé- 
rieur, en prévision de cas extraordi- 
naires, 37, 38, — (25 avril 1812.) 
Question & Decrés au sujet des cétes 
auxquelles s'applique le nouveau décret 
pris en faveur de la péche; I'Empereur 
désirerait lever les entraves qui génent 
les pécheurs sur toutes les eétes de 
lEmpire, 385. 

Peter (Comte), conseiller d'Etat, 55. 

Pensions. — (27 décembre 1811.) L’Em- 
pereur se plaint de la suppression arbi- 
traire d’une pension allouée & une fa- 
mille ionienne; ordre formel d’exécuter 
le décret rendu a ce sujet, 117. 

Pénicnon (Comte), maréchal, gouverneur 
de Naples, 421, 423. 

Pgrxety (Baron), général de division 
dartillerie, 32, 48, 532. 

Prvyron, colonel, 249. 

Pre VII. V. Papauré. 

Piné (Baron px), général de brigade, 104, 
152, 243, 

Piavzonyg (Baron), général de brigade, 
392, 461. 

Proruo (Dz), 398. 

Potice GévinaLe. — (20 novembre 1811.) 
Reproches 4 Savary au sujet d’une arres- 
tation arbitraire ; I'Empereur entend que 
tout citoyen francais puisse user du droit 
de recours auprés du souverain, 24. 

Potonaises (Troupes). V. Granoe Armée , 
Pontarowskr, Varsovix (Grand-duché 
de). 

eras sukpoise. — (19 janvier 1812.) 
Ordre & Davout doccuper la Poméra- 


579 


nie suédoise et d’y saisir toutes les 
denrées de contrebande, 182. — 
(1¢F juin.) Instructions concernant la 
défense dela Poméranie snédoise pen- 
dant la campagne de 1812; généraux 
chargés d'y tenir des troupes, 452 a 
456. 

Ponsatowsxt (Prince) , commandant Iar- 
mée du grand-duché de Varsovie 
(5° corps de Ja Grande Armée). — 
(14 novembre 1811.) Kventualité d'un 
mouvement combiné de Poniatowski et 
de Davout contre les Prussiens, 14. — 
(3 mars 1812.) Le corps d’armée po- 
lonais formera, sous le commandement 
de Poniatowski, le 5° corps de la 
Grande Armée, 277; ordre A Ponia- 
towski de se tenir en correspondance 
avec l’avant-garde du prince d'Eckmihl, 
279. — (6 mars.) Le commandant du 
5° corps fera avancer ses troupes vers 
la Vistule, 287. — (16 mars.) Il se 
concentrera sur Varsovie, 317. — 
(26 mars.) Occupation prochaine de 
Modlin par Poniatowski, 433, — 
(10 juin.) Il portera, le 18, son quar- 
tier général a Nowogrod, 480. — 
(11 juin.) Mesures prises pour avoir 
des nouvelles de Poniatowski , 485 : 
486. — (16 juin.) Ordre a ce général 
de se porter sur Johannishurg, afin de 
pouvoir passer le Niemen avant Bagra- 
tion, 503. VU. Varsovie (Grand-daché 
de). 

pore ET cHausskes. V. Travaux pupics, 

Prapr (Baron pz) , archevéque de Malines, 
ambassadeur de IEmpereur prés le duc 
de Varsovie. — (28 mai 1812.) In- 
structions confiées A ce prélat en vue 
du rétablissement de la Pologne, 441 
a 446. V. Vansoviz (Grand-duché de). 

Prisoners DE GugRRE. — (12 novembre 
1811.) Ordre & Clarke de remettre un 
certain nombre de prisonniers anglais 
au Transport-Office; motif de leur libé- 
ration, 6. — (25 novembre.) Ordre a 
Decrés d’envoyer une frégate recueillir 
des prisonniers francais sur le rocher de 
Cabrera, 35. — (25 décembre.) Cette 
mission est confiée au capitaine de fré- 
gate Feretier , 108.— (25 mars 1812.) 
Note concernant la réponse a faire & 
une dépéche du Transport-Office, rela~ 
tivement 4 T’échange des prisonniers ; 
défiance qu'inspirent a 'Empereur Jes 
intentions du gouvernement anglais , 


580 


340. — (Mars, sans date.) Le ministre 
de la marine offrira au Transport-Office 
d'appliquer aux officiers seuls le mode 
d'échange qui n’a pas été agréé pour 
les soldats, 352. 

Prusse. — (12 novembre 1811.) Conti- 
nuation des armements de la Prusse ; 
envoi d'une division francaise & Erfurt ; 
instructions pour le ministre de France 
& Berlin, 1, 2. — (14 novembre. ) 
Instructions & Davout sur les précau- 
tions militaires 4 prendre en prévision 
du cas ot la Prusse se déclarerait con- 
tre Napoléon, 14, 15. — Nécessilé 
d’empécher Ja Prusse d’agir, si elle en 
avait la velléité, en se metlant 4 méme 
de cerner toutes les places au moyen 
d’équipages de siége préparés d’avance 
dans cette vue, 15. — (6 février 
1812.) Ordre a la Riboisiére de pré- 
parer secrétement les équipages desti- 
nés a faire éventuellement le siége de 
Spandau, Kolberg et Graudenz, 207. 
— (ie? mars.) L’Empereur demande a 
Daru la note de ce que la Prusse doit 
fournir 4 la Grande Armée, 273. — 
(2 mars.) Ordre au ministre de France 
a Berlin de demander, aussitét aprés 
la ratification du traité d'alliance, que 
la Prusse arme et approvisionne la 
place de Memel, 274. — (16 mars.) 
Clause du traité franco-prussien stipu- 
Jant Ja non-occupation de Potsdam, 
itinéraire prescrit en conséquence aux 
troupes de la Grande Armée, 316. — 
Fournitures a faire par la Prusse aux 
termes du traité conclu avec elle, 320, 
324, — (25 mars.) Le prince d'Eck- 
miihl et le duc de Reggio laisseront des 
garnisons suffisantes dans Magdeburg 
et Berlin, 335. — Ordres au major 
général de la Grande Armée au sujet 
du contingent prussien, 337. — In- 
structions sur le méme sujet, 337. — 
(31 mars.) Ordre au prince d’Eckmiihl 
d'occuper Pillau, 351. — Le major 
général de la Grande Armée fera dresser 
une carte routiére de Ja Prusse pour 
servir aux opérations , 352. — (9 avril.) 
Mesures a prendre pour la défense de 
Pillan, 364. — (12 avril.) Ordres 
concernant |'exécution du traité conclu 
avec la Prusse; chiffre du contingent 
prussien; clauses relatives aux places 
de guerre; arrangements prescrifs en 


CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie. 


réchal Victor , commandant le 9° corps, 
est nommé gouverneur général d Ber~ 
lin; instructions qui lui sont adresséos 
au sujet des troupes prussiennes ot dos 
places qui obéiront a des officiers fran» 
cais; l'administration du pays restora 
aux agents du roi de Prusse, mais Ia 
surveillance des journaux et la police 
seront dans Ja main du duc de Bellune; 
en un mot, il fant que la Prusse soil 
réduite a l'impuissance de faire un 
mouvement, et ne puisse, en ancii 
cas, s'insurger, 378. — (25 avril, ) 
Mesures prises pour assurer la défense 
des céles prussiennes de la Baltique; 
unité imprimée 4 la direction des af» 
faires militaires en Prusse, 383, <= 
(30 avril.) Dispositions relatives a l'are 
mement d'Erfurt, od s‘élablira un gée 
néral de brigade, 391. — (2 mai.) 
Numéros & donner aux divisions 0! 
brigades prussiennes , 395. — (7 mai,) 
Ordre & Davout d’aviser a l'occupation 
de la citadelle de Pillan, 397, << 
(21 mai.) Importance de Spandau; 
instructions pour l’armement de colte 
place, 415. — (23 mai.) Envoi au due 
de Bassano d'un rapport concernant loa 
magasins de subsistances de Kolberg , 
419, — (27 mai.) Note pour le mix 
nistre des relations extérieures au sujol 
des places de Pillau et de Spandau, 
437. — (28 mai.) Ordre a Davout 
d’ajourner |'occupation de Pillau, 44%, 
— (1¢ juin.) Instructions touchant la 
distribution des troupes francaises dans 
les diverses places prussiennes , 452, — 
Officiers supérieurs qui devront ¢tre 
attachés & Ia place de Spandau; elle 
sera mise en état de soutenir un siégo, 
456. — (6 juin.) Une partie des trou» 
pes prussiennes adjointes 4 la Grande 
Armée seront chargées d'occuper Lie 
biau et Tilsit, 474. — (9 juin.) Ordre 
concernant la prise de possession, au 
profit de la Grande Armée, des fusils 
de Pillau, 477. — (13 juin.) Positions 
assignées aux froupes prussiennes A 
Tilsit et Labiau, 487. — (14 juin.) 
Nomination d'un gouverneur de la vieille 
Prusse en résidence 4 Keenigsberg, 489. 
— (15 juin.) Dispositions relatives 4 
la défense du Nehrung et de Pillau, 
garnisons & mettre dans Kenigsberg, 
Thorn, Marienbarg et Elbing, 492. 


conséquence , 367. — (22 avril.) Lema- Puries pe La Ganpe, 59, 83, 297. 


we 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 584 


Q 


Queunor (Baron), général de brigade de Quiverrs pz Czrway (Baron), général de 


cuirassiers, 105. 


R 


Ravziwit (Prince pg) , 443. 

Rauroy (Comte), sénateur, général de 
division, 45, 55, 285, 394. 

Rare (Comte), général de division, gou- 
verneur de Danzig, 14, 15, 45, 425, 
476. 

Receio (Duc pz). V. Ovptvor. 

Riicnte réopat. V. Féopau (Régime). 

Recnaup pe Sait-Jean-p'Ancéty (Comte) , 
ministre d'Etat, président de la section 
de l'intérieur au Conseil d’Etat, 303. 


Rete (Comte), général de division, 4 


brigade, 103, 105. 


de Reynier 4 Brock, 525. V. Gnayox 
Armés. ~ 


Risoisitre (Comte pe La), commandant 


l'artillerie de la Grande Armée, 207, 
250, 310, 377. 


Ricurer (Baron) , général de brigade , 105. 
Rocuet (Baron) , général de division, 300, 


354, 373, 440, 516, 524. 


Romanzor (Comte pg), chancelier de l'Em- 


pire, président du Conseil d’Rtat, a 
Saint-Pétershourg , 388. 


Rome, 21. V. Traum. 


Tl'armée d'Espagne, 21, 22,138, 139, Russi. — (12 novembre 1811.) Dépé- 


140, 185, 262, 356. 

Reiwnarp (Baron), ministre de France & 
Cassel, 201. 

Riserve pe cavaLenie. — (2 janvier 1812.) 
Divisions qui composent Ia réserve, 153. 
— (10 janvier.) La réserve sera divisée 
en trois corps; généraux chargés d'un 
commandement, 163. — (23 février.) 
Date fixée pour le passage du Rhin par 
le 2° corps de la réserve, 250. — 
(24 mars.) Instructions pour compléter 
lorganisation de la réserve de cavalerie, 
332. V. Gravve Anuée. 

Revvaup (Nicolas), baron, général de bri- 
gade, 103, 105. 

Revver (Comte), général de division, 
commandant le contingent saxon ou 
7¢ corps de la Grande Armée. — (3 mars 
1812.) Mesures & prendre par Reynier 
pour assurer l'approvisionnement de son 
corps sur la Vistule , 280. — (16 mars.) 
Ce général recevra l’ordre de se porter 
sur Kalisz, 319. — (26 mars. ) Canton- 
nements qu'il devra donner au 7° corps, 
343. — (10 juin. ) Mouvement du 
corps de Reynier sur Lublin; dés que 
les Autrichiens seront 4 Zamosc, il ré- 
trogradera sur Praga , 480. — (16 juin.) 
Ordre & Reynier de filer, non plus sur 
Praga, mais sur Siedlce, et de la sur 
Brock, ou ses troupes formeront la 
droite du corps de Jérdme, 502. — 
(20 juin.) Tandis que l'armée se diri- 
gera en masse sur le Niemen, Reynier 
restera charqé de convrir le duché de 


Varsovie, 515. (21 jum.) Position 


che 4 expédier A l'ambassadeur de France 
a Saint-Pétersbourg ; désir de Napoléon 
de voir finir promptement ses diffé- 
rends avec la Russie; Lauriston laissera 
entrevoir au czar les conséquences que 
peut entrainer la continuation des arme- 
ments de la Prusse, 1,2. — (20 dé- 
cembre.) Projet de I'Empereur d'orga- 
niser , en cas de guerre avec la Russie, 
un service de- surveillance autour de 
l’armée russe et sur les diverses routes 
de Pétersbourg , Moscou et Grodno, 95. 
— (21 décembre.) Recherche a faire 
pour s'assurer de l'état exact de situa- 
tion de l’armée russe, 98. — (27 jan- 
vier 1812.) L’'Empereur expose au roi 
de Westphalie les griefs de la France 
contre la Russie, les levées extraordi- 
naires failes par le czar, et tous les 
symptémes qui annoncent une guerre 
imminente, 190. — (24 février.) Na- 
poléon informe le czar d'un entretien 
qu'il a eu avec Czernitchef « sur les af- 
faires facheuses survenves depuis qninze 
mois » , et assure qu'il est encore au pou- 
voir d’Alexandre d'empécher la guerre, 
253. — (2 mars.) Instructions pour 
Lauriston ; I'Empereur ajourne toute 
entrevue avec le czar, mais il consenti- 
rait 4 ce qu'on noual des négociations 
quand ses troupes seront sur la Vistule, 
273. — (3 mars.) Plaintes adressées 
au ministre de Russie 4 Paris au sujet 
des menées d'espionnage et de corrup- 
lion organisées dans les bureaux de la 
guerre par Czernitchef;  I'Kmpereur 


582 CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie. 


compte qu’Alexandre fera bonne justice 
de ces procédés, 275. — (25 mars.) 
Instructions pour le prince d’Eckmihl, 
pendant le mouvement en masse de la 
Grande Armée vers la Vistule; tant que 
les Russes n’attaqueront pas, son lan- 
gage et son attitude doivent demeurer 
pacifiques, 339. — (28 mars.) Obser- 
vations au ministre des relations exté- 
rieures au sujet d'un état de ]’armée 
russe, 345. — (30 mars.) L’Empereur 
pense que les Russes ne prendront pas 
Yoffensive ; le prince d’Eckmiuhl ne fera 
donc aucun mouvement avant d’en avoir 
regu l’ordre, 349. — (18 avril.) Con- 
duite prescrite 4 Davout dans le cas ou 
les Russes s'empareraient de Memel et 
de Ja rive droite du Niemen sans passer 
le fleave, 374. — (25 avril.) Arrivée 
& Paris d'un officier russe porteur de 
propositions du czar Alexandre , 386.— 
Envoi du comte de Narbonne 4 Saint- 
Pétersbourg ; communications pacifiques 
qu'il est chargé de faire & Romanzof, 
388, — (10 juin.) Positions respecti- 
ves des armées russe et frangaise; éven- 
tualité d'un mouvement offensif des 
Russes entre la Narew et le Bug ; Napo- 
léon combine ses manceuvres afin que 
Yaile gauche de la Grande Armée puisse 
passer le Niemen et déborder sur les 
flancs de l’ennemi, 480. — L’Empe- 
reur déclare au vice-roi que l'on est 


Saire-Suzanng (Comte pg), sénateur, gé- 
néral de division, 285. 

Saint-Gennis (Baron), général de brigade, 
103, 104, 153. 

Sarr-Genaain (Baron pg), général de di- 
vision, a la réserve de cavalerie, 61, 
105, 153, 164, 545. 

Satt-Mansan (Comte pz), conseiller d'Etat, 
ministre plénipotentiaire de France 4 
Berlin, 1, 14, 274, 368, 383, 384. 
V. Prossg. 

Sait-Prigst (Comte pg), 108. 

Saint-Sorrice (Comte pg), général de di- 
vision, 188, 337. 

Sauieny (M™°), 49. 

Santé (Service de). — (2 février 1812. ) 
Observations sur la situation des mala- 
des 4 I’hépital de Miinster, 201. — 
(10 mars. ) Etat sanitaire de l'armée; 
diminution du nombre des malades dans 


encore en paix avec la Russie, mais 
qu'on touche «au dernier moment +, 
482, — (11 juin.) Mouvement do Bax 
gration sur Brzesc ; conjectures de |'Kim= 
pereur sur le but de cette manmuvre, 
qu'il croit destinée 4 couvrir Vilna au 
moyen d'une bataille , 484. — (29 juin, ) 
Bulletin de la Grande Armée : Napow 
léon rappelle l'offensive prise par a 
Russie contre la Pologne en février 
1811,. les vains efforts-de la France 
pour amener une conciliation , les armd~ 
ments auxquels, par suite, elle so vit 
forcée d’avoir recours , les trailés d'al« 
liance avec la Prusse et l'Autriche, at 
finalement la mise en marche et la con+ 
centration de la Grande Armée sur le 
Niemen, 521. — (21 juin.) Arrivde 
d'un parlementaire au quartier général 
de Poniatowski; ordre de I'Empereur ( 
cette occasion, 522. — (23 juin, ) 
Ordre réglant le passage du Niemen par 
la Grande Armée, 531. — (26 juin.) 
Marche offensive des généraux Bagqo~ 
voute et Toutchkof sur Vilna, 544, <= 
(29 juin.) L’Empereur annonce au rol 
Jéréme son entrée a Vilna, évacudée par 
les Russes, et lui commande de mare 
cher contre Bagration , 546. —(30 juin.) 
Rencontre d'Oudinot et de Wittgenstein 
a Vilkomir; les Russes sont rejetés sur 
Dinabourg , 547. V. Axexanpas IP, 
Gnanpg Ange, 


la plapart des divisions militaires, 298, 
— (21 mai.) Ordre aux chirurgiens do 
la Grande Armée de rejoindre lours 
corps respectifs sur la Vistule, 414, = 
(28 mai.) Toute la réserve des hdpi« 
taux sera dirigée sur Danzig, 448, == 
(31 mai.) Mesures prescrites relativo~ 
ment aux ambulances de la Grande 
Armée, 450. — (4 juin.) Ordres tou- 
chant l’organisation d’hdpitaux & Thorn, 
Wloclawek , Danzig , Osterode, Ka» 
nigsberg, Wehlau, Soldau, Willen« 
berg et Pultusk, 464. — Observations 
sur l'insalubrité de I'hépital de Thorn ; 
nécessité d'en former un a Plock pour 
le 4¢ corps, 466. — (14 juin.) Btu» 
blissement d’hépitavx sur Jes derridros 
dela Grande Armée, depuis Kenigsherg 
jusqu’a Ja Pregel et I'Alle, 490. - 

(15 juin.) Ordre au vice-roi de former 














TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


un hdpital & Rastenburg, en quittant 
cette place , 497. 

Saunier (Baron), général de brigade, 533. 

Savary, duc de Rovigo, général de divi- 
‘sion, ministre de la police générale. 
V. Potice. 

Saxe. —(29 décembre 1811.) Ordre a Mol- 
lien de prendre pour 1 million de l'em- 
prunt saxon, 130. — (4 février 1812. ) 
Instructions relatives 4 l’organisation de 
T'armée saxonne, 239. V. Reynier, Var- 
sovig (Grand-duché de ). 

Saxe (Maréchal pg). —(6 janvier 1812.) 
Jugement de |l’Empereur sur les Réveries 
du maréchal de Saxe; ordre d’envoyer 
aux généraux francais en Espagne un 
résumé des idées émises par ce général 
sur la question des contributions de 
guerre, 159. 

Saxonnes (Troupes). V. Granve Aamie. 

Scur (Baron), général de brigade , 346, 
437, 

Scawanz (Baron), général de brigade, 106. 

Scrwarzenpere (Prince pe) , commandant 
le corps d’armée autrichien d’observa- 
tion en Gallicie, 93, 413, 433, 496, 
518, 546. 

Sgpastiant (Comte), général de division, 
248. 

Sznas (Comte), général de division, 456. 

Srverour, général de division & l’armée 
d'Espagne, 137. 

Sicuz (Ile de), dans la Méditerranée. — 
(18 novembre 1811.) Conséquences de 
Ja levée du camp de Scilla par le roi de 
Naples ; nécessité de menacer d'un nou- 
vean débarquement les Anglais établis 
en Sicile; troupes 4 réunir en vue de 
cette opération , 19. 

Smréon, ministre de Ia justice et de ]'inté- 
rieur du royaume de Westphalie, 115, 
201. 

Soxotnickr, général de brigade, 496. 

Sorsizn (Comte), général de division, 76, 
85, 337, 488, 524, 526. 

Sousam (Comte), général de division, a 
Yarmée de Portugal, 139, 140. | 
Soutr, maréchal, duc de Dalmatie, chef 
d’état-major de l’armée d’Espagne. — 
(19 novembre 1811.) Ordre 4 Soult de 
faciliter, au moyen d'une diversion , la 
prise de Valence par Suchet, 21. — 
(6 décembre. ) Instructions pour le dac 
de Dalmatie: mancwuvres prescriles a ce 
maréchal dans le sud de I'Kspagne, 58, 


583 


59. —(18 février 1812.) Ordre 4 Soult 
de contenir le général Hill sur la rive 
gauche du Tage, afin d’empécher sa 
jonction avec Wellington , 229, 232, 
V. Espacwe ( Opérations en). 

Spezia (La). V. Marine. (Service général et 
constructions. 

Susgavie (Baron), général de brigade, 519. 

Sunsistances (Service des). — (8 février 
1812.) Dispositions relatives au prix da 
pain et de Ja farine de réserve, 209. 
— (10 mars.) Mesure 4 prendre pour 
répartir ce qui reste du fonds affecté 
au service des subsistances, 297. — 
(27 mars. ) Kclaircissements demandés 
par I'Empereur sur un procés-verbal 
d'une séance du conseil des subsistan- 
ces, 345, — (1 juin.) Taxation du 
blé par le préfet de Caen; obsercation 
de 'Empereur ‘4 ce sujet; il désire que 
l'on expédie 4 Caen des blés de la Roér, 
451. 

Sucner (Comte), maréchal, commandant 
Je 3° corps de l’armée d'Espagne. — 
— (19 novembre 1811.) Ce maréchal 
devra s’emparer le plus tét possible de 
Valence; importance que |'Empereur 
attache a cette opération, 21, 22. — 
(5 décembre. ) Ordre relatif a des cor- 
respondances indiscrétes de la maréchale 
Suchet, 49. — (26 décembre.) Com- 
mencement du siége de Valence, 111. 
— (30 décembre. ) Aprés la prise de 
Valence, Suchet conservera le gouver- 
nement de cette place; instructions qui 
devront lui étre envoyées, 137, 138. 
— V. Espaone (Opérations en). 

Sutpz. — (27 décembre 1811.) Menace 
d'une rupture avec le cabinet de Stock- 
holm s'il tolére I’établissement des An- 
glais dans la baie de Geteborg, 117. 
— (29 décembre. ) Décision relative a 
une demande du prince royal de Suéde 
pour faire apprendre les batteries fran- 
gaises aux tambours suédois, 131. — 
(19 janvier 1812. ) Observation sur 
une note 4 transmeltre au ministre de 
Suéde a Paris, 181. — (22 février.) 
Ordre au prince d’Eckmuhl d’interdire 
toute communication de la Poméranie 
avecla Suéde, 249. —(20 mai.) Conduite 
prescrite 4 Davout envers les Suédois, 
All. 
ssé. V. Conringration nenvétiour. 

» (Comte pe). V. Conun. 





584 CORRESPONDANCE 


DE NAPOLEON Ie. 


i 


TaLuevrano, prince de Bénévent, vice- 
grand électeur, 109, 200. 

Tatievrann (Auguste pz), comte, chambel- 
lan de 'Empereur, ministre de France 
prés la Confédération helvétique. — 
(26 décembre 1811.) Dispositions con- 
cernant le réglement d’une question 
d'intérét entre ce ministre et le prince 
de Bénévent , 109. 

Tatreyranp (Comtesse pg), 110. 

Tanayne (Baron ), général hollandais, 528, 

34, 


Tascner pg 1a Pacer (Comte), officier 
d’ordonnance de I’Empereur, 508. 

Tavzten, général prussien, 368. 

Taviet (Baron) , général de division, 33. 

Turra-Lasour, ex-lieutenant-colonel d’ar- 
tillerie, 40. 

Tuarnzau (Baron), général de division, 
278. : 

Tuouvexot (Baron), général de brigade, a 
Yarmée d'Espagne , 22. 

Toscaxg. — (23 mai 1812.) Mesures a 
prendre pour défendre I'ile d'Elbe me- 
nacée par les Anglais, 420. 

Tour (La). V. Barter pg ra Tour. 

TourcuKor, général russe, 544, 548. 

Travaux puniics. — (20 novembre 1811.) 
Observations relatives aux travaux de 
Lyon, 23. — (30 novembre. ) Ordre 
concernant Ja construction d’un chantier 
de carénage a Marseille, 40. —(3 mars 
1812.) Projet de transférer au Louvre 
la Bibliothéque impériale et les Archives ; 
l'Empereur propose encore le palais du 
Luxembourg pour recevoir les Archives 
ou la bibliothéque de Sainte-Geneviéve; 
Daru fera un rapport sur cette ques- 
tion , 280. 

Travor (Baron ), général de division, 260, 

Trésor Punic. — (28 décembre. ) Réponse 
4 des rapports de Mollien concernant 
les finances des provinces illyriennes ; 


V 


Vatence, général de division, a la réserve 
de cavalerie, 152, 164, 545, 550. 

Vatay (Due ps). V. Kentenmann. 

Vaxpawaz, comte d’Unsebourg , général de 
division, commandant le 8® corps de 
la Grande Armée. — (16 mars 1812.) 
An cas ow les Russes attaqueraient le 


explications détaillées a ce sujet, 110, 
— (29 décembre. ) Ordre au ministre 
du Trésor public de prendre pour | mil» 
lion de l'emprunt saxon, 130.— Somme 
en espéces et en papier a envoyer 4 Bare 
celone, 131. — (3 janvier 1812, ) 
Observations 4 Mollien au sujet d'une 
opération contraire aux intéréts du 'Tré« 
sor, 154, — (14 janvier.) Instructions 
concernant la comptabilité de la Grande 
Armée, 173. — (19 février.) Ordre 
au ministre du Trésor public de négo» 
cier les actions du canal du Midi ot du 
canal da Loing, 240. — (11 mars, ) 
Des bons du Trésor, payables en partie 
& Venise ou a Trieste , seront envoyds, 
au lien d'argent, 4 Corfou, 303, = 
(29 mars.) L’'Empereur réclame de 
Mollien un état des fonds destinés & 
payer diverses dépenses mililaires, 348, 
— (5 mai.) Ordres concernant les dite 
tributions de fonds pour la Grande 
Armée, 397. V. Buncer, Finances. 

Tnévise (Duc vz). V. Monin. 

Trieste, ville d'Illyrie, 70. 

Tupiven, ingénieur, 341. 

Turquis. — (14 novembre 1811.) Sue 
cés des Russes sur les Tures; appréciaw 
tion par Napoléon de la conduite de cos 
derniers , 15. — (30 mars 1812.) Supe 
position de I’Empereur au sujet d'un 
renouvellement éventuel d'hostilités on» 
tre le ezar et la Turquie, 349. 

Tynot. — (28 mars 1812.) Dispositions 
a prendre pour assurer la défense du 
Tyrol pendant la campagne qui va s'0u« 
vrir, 346. — (29 mars.) Le soin de 
contenir, au besoin, le Tyrol et le Vow 
rarlberg sera confié aux forces combi» 
nées de la Suisse et de la Confédération 
du Rhin, 347. — (23 mai.) Nouvel« 
les instructions pour réprimer, lo one 
échéant, une insurrection du Tyrol , 
422, 


Grand-Duché, le 8 corps avec Vane 
damme contribuera a la défense de Vare 
sovie, 314. 

Varsovie (Grand-duché de). — (25 no» 
vembre 1811.) Observations sur le maus 
vais état de l'armée polonaisc ; faiblewm 
relative du contingent militaire fourm 


—— 


TABLE ANALYTIQUE. 


par le Grand-Duché, 36.— (2 décem- 
bre. ) Services rendus par la France au 
grand-duché de Varsovie; !Empereur 
voudrait pouvoir compter avec assurance 
sur la vitalité de ce pays, 44. — 
(15 décembre. ) Ordres pour l’appro- 
visionnement des places de Modlin et de 
Zamosc , 81. — (19 décembre.) Achat 
secret de chevaux 4 faire dans le Grand- 
Duché, 93.— (31 décembre.) Instruc- 
tions pour le résident de France 4 Var- 
sovie au sujet des armements 4 pousser 
dans le Grand-Duché; renseignements 
a prendre sur les ressources en subsis- 
tances que ce pays pourrait fournir on 
qu'il faudrait y faire arriver par la Vis- 
tule, 144. — Ordres concernant la 
formation d’un dépét de cavalerie sur 
la Vistule, et la création d'un bataillon 
d'équipages militaires dans le Grand- 
Duché ; nécessité de compléter l'arme- 
ment et la remonte de la cavalerie polo- 
naise, et de préparer, « comme avant 
la campagne de Friedland, » des moyens 
de convoi et de transport en Pologne , 
148. — (7 janvier 1812.) Observa- 
tions relatives 4 l'armement des gardes 
nationales dans Je Grand-Duché, 161. 
— (4 février. ) Représentations 4 faire 
4 la cour de Dresde au sujet de l'orga- 
nisation de l'armée polonaise , 204, — 
(26 mars. ) Echelonnement des troupes 
polonaises dans le Grand-Duché ; elles 
devront pouvoir se masser en trois jours 
sur Praga ou Modlin, 342. — Approvi- 
sionnements de poudre & réunir dans 
les diverses places du Grand-Duché, 344. 
— (22 mai.) Envoi 4 Varsovie de fonds 
destinés au service de l'armée polonaise, 
419. — (28 mai.) Création d'un gou- 
vernement spécial du duché de Varsovie; 
il résidera dans un conseil de ministres; 
attributions de ce conseil ; réle prescrit 
4 l'ambassadeur de I'Empereur a Varso- 
vie ; le plan de Napoléon est de préparer 
le rétablissement de la Confédération de 
Ja Pologne; on commencera par convo- 
quer la diéte nationale; un comité, 
nommé par elle, rédigera un rapport 
explicite sur les malheurs du pays et 
sur les moyens de le reconstituer en 
corps politique: Ja Prusse et l'Autriche 
devront étre ménagées avec soin dans 
celte sorte d'acte d'accusation dirigé ex- 
clusivement contre la Russie; a ce mani- 


585 
feste officiel répondront une série de 
déclarations particuliéres concues de 
maniére & remuer fortement !'opinion 
publique; enfin la Confédération, une 
fois formée, enverra & l'Empereur des 
députés chargés de lui demander sa pro- 
tection, 441, 447. — (5 juin.) Ordre 
d’organiser la garde nationale de Var- 
sovie, 470. — (15 juin.) Le major 
général de Ja Grande Armée dirigera 
sur Elbing et Thorn une provision de 
fusils destinés a armer les insurgés po- 
lonais, 495. 

Vepe, général de division, 528. 

Vervier (Comte), général de division , 
107, 249, 307, 316, 330, 335, 339. 


Ver Huent (Comte), vice-amiral, 211, 


309. 


Vicror Perriv, duc de Bellune, maréchal, 


— (6 décembre 1811.) L’autorisatior 
de rentrer en France lui sera transmise 
par Berthier, 59. — (3 avril 1812.) 
L'Empereur projette de confier a Victor 
le commandement d'un 9° corps, qui 
serait eréé 4 Ja Grande Armée, 355. — 
(22 avril.) Le duc de Bellune est mis 
a la téte du 9° corps; il aura pour mis- 
sion de surveiller, de Berlin, tout le 
pays entre la Vistule et le Rhin, 378, 
— (11 juin.) Renforts expédiés au ma- 
réchal Victor , 483. V. Gnaypg Anwée. 

Vienotte (Comte vz) , général de division, 
215, 347, 422. 

Vuttantroys , colonel d'artillerie, inventeur 
d'une nouvelle espéce de mortier. — 
(20 novembre. ) Le comité des fortifi- 
cations déterminera l’usage 4 faire des 
mortiers 4 la Villantroys, pour la dé- 
fense de la rade du Morbihan, 25, — 
Satisfaction causée 4 l'Empereur par le 
résultat des expériences faites a la Fére 
avec les mortiers a la Villantroys; ordre 
de poursuivre activement les essais; le 
nouvel engin pourra servir a défendre 
contre les Anglais les mouillages et les 
cdtes de l'Ouest, 25 , 26. — Avantages 
que présente, au point de vue maritime, 
Yinvention du colonel Villantroys ; parti 
que le ministre de la marine aura 4 en 
tirer, 27. 


Vitanet-Joyguse} vice-amiral, gouverneur 


de Venise, 297. 

Vutata, général de brigade italien, 105, 
133. 

Vivits, général de brigade , 107. 


586 CORRESPONDANCE DE NAPOLEON Ie, 
Ww 


Watrnn (Comte vz), général de division, 
commandant les grenadiers & cheval de 
la Garde, 288, 299, 336. 

Warrier, général de division, 4 la ré- 
serve de cavalerie, 164, 247, 332. 
Wetuneton (Duc ve), généralissime des 
forces anglaises dans la péninsule espa- 
gnole. — (18 février 1812.) Situation 
de lord Wellington sur le Tage; éven- 
tualité d'une jonction du corps de Hill 
a l'armée de ce général; mancuvres 
accomplies par les Anglais par suite des 
fautes de Marmont; mesures a prendre 
au cas ol Wellington, contre toutes les 
conjectures de I'Empereur, se porterait 
sur Ja rive gauche du Tage, 228 4 235. 

Wesut, ville du grand-duché de Berg. — 
(12 novembre 1811.) Réorganisation 
administrative de cette ville; de quelle 
maniére ,sa dette devra étre réglée; 
Wesel deviendra le chef-lieu d’un arron- 
dissement et aura un tribunal de pre- 
miére instance; ordre au préfet de la 
Roér d’y établir un systéme satisfaisant 
déclairage; travaux projetés pour l’ali- 
gnement et l'embellissement de Wesel ; 
!Empereur désire qu'on y établisse un 
hépital civil et des écoles francaises, 2. 
— Une partie du pare de réserve sera 
installée & Wesel, ot I’on établira un 
atelier de réparation; on prendra d’ur- 
gence les églises de la ville, hormis 
deux, pour y déposer le matériel , 7. 

Wesrpnati. — (10 décembre 1811.) In- 
structions a transmettre au ministre de 
France 4 Cassel; enquéte prescrite sur 
lesprit qui anime les troupes westphe- 
liennes , 67. — Prochaine concentration 
de troupes en Westphalie; convention 
militaire 4 conclure a cette occasion afin 
d’épargner un excédant de charges au 
roi Jéréme , 68, — (15 décembre.) In- 
structions adressées 4 ce sujet au maré- 
chal Davout, 81. — (17 décembre.) 
Ordre 4 Jéréme Napoléon de hater l’or- 
ganisation de son armée pour la pro- 


Y 


Yorcx , général prussien, 351, 364. 


chaine campagne, et de pourvoir ay 
gouvernement et a Ja défense de la Wout» 
phalie, dans le cas od il s'absentorail, 
90. — (19 décembre.) Achat secret de 
chevaux 4 faire en Westphalie, 94, 
(24 décembre.) Arrangement i cone 
clure avec le roi Jéréme pour |'indem~= 
niser des frais de solde supportés par la 
Westphalie au dela des conventions faites 
a ce sujet, 103. — (26 décembre, ) 
Observations sur les mesures projotdes 
par Jéréme en vue de Ja campagne qui 
va s‘ouvrir ; jugement concernant quole 
ques hommes investis de la confiance du 
roi de Westphalie; mesures 4 prendre 
pour compléter l’organisation de l'armée 
westphalienne ; quantité de rations qu'elle 
devra porter avec elle ; prescriptions ro« 
latives 4 Yéquipement, 115, 116, 
(27 janvier 1812.) L'Empereur expose 
4 Jéréme Napoléon I’état des relations 
entre la France et la Russie, et l'invile 
4 tenir son contingent prét a entrer on 
campagne au 15 février, 190. — (2 fi 
vrier.) Meurtre commis sur un cuiraje 
sier frangais en Westphalie; plaintes de 
Napoléon sur certaines tendances du ou 
vernement de Cassel; défense de défirer 
les délits militaires aux tribunaux civils, 
201. — (22 février.) Ordre au roi de 
Westphalie de réunir son corps d'arméo 
4 Halle; il passera I'Elbe au pont de 
Dessau, 248. — (28 février.) Obsere 
vations sur I’ organisation défectueuse dos 
troupes westphaliennes; réformes h y 
opérer pour en faire un corps d'arméo 
facile 4 manier, 259. — (3 mars.) Lon 
troupes westphaliennes formeront le huis 
liéme corps de la Grande Armée , 277, 
V. Jinome Napouton. 

Wryren (Comte pu), vice-amiral, 211, 296, 

Wirreeystes (Prince), lieutenant général 
russe , 537, 544, 550. 


Woumtemonr, général de brigade, 260, 


Wurreusercroises (Troupes). V. Gaanve 
Arun. 


Z 


Zaxnzewsk1, capitaine, attaché a I’état-major du duc de Danzig, 540. 
ZixcareLi1 , compositeur italien. — (21 janvier 1812.) Subvention accordée par I'lim 


pereur a cet artiste, 183. 


Zuceni, général de brigade, a Varmée d'lalie, 346, 437. 


LISTE DES PERSONNES 
A QUI LES LETTRES SONT ADRESSEES. 


Avexanpne Ie , empereur de Russie, 253, 201, 212, 225, 228, 260, 271, 281, 
388. 304, 305, 306, 309, 310, 313, 328, 
Atexanpre (Berthier) , major général de 353, 359, 363, 367, 373, 386, 388, 
Yarmée d'Espagne, puis de la Grande 393, 394, 399, 400, 401, 404, 406, 
Armée, 21, 22, 27, 36, 41, 42, 49, 419, 420, 423, 424, 430, 437, 439, 
58, 79, 101, 102, 136, 147, 153, 447, 464, 486, 500, 501, 522. 
157, 158, 159, 161, 180, 185, 187, Coxtiw vg Sussy, ministre des manufac- 
198, 212, 213, 216, 223, 228, 242, tures et du commerce, 28, 163, 297, 
244, 245, 247, 248, 249, 251, 252, 345, 451. 
253, 259, 263, 272, 277, 278, 286, Daru, ministre secrétaire d’Etat, 175, 
293, 296, 299, 306, 307, 308, 312, 189, 257, 273, 326. 
313, 314, 315, 316, 319, 327, 329, Davour, maréchal, 14, 15, 34, 36, 43, 
330, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 44, 52, 60, 68, 81, 85, 95, 96, 97, 
339, 342, 343, 344, 349, 351, 355, 103, 118, 140, 141, 148, 154, 160, 
356, 358, 359, 362, 365, 366, 367, 161, 163, 166, 177, 182, 194, 201, 
369, 371, 374, 376, 378, 386, 387, 215,218, 432, 467, 472, 490, 499, 
389, 390, 391, 392, 394, 396, 397, 505, 519, 541, 550. 
398, 405, 406, 411, 412, 413, 414, Decrts, ministre de la marine, 13, 18, 
415, 418, 419, 425, 427, 431, 439, 19, 27, 29, 33, 35, 40, 46, 52, 56, 
440, 447, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 60, 70, 71, 114, 118, 129, 130, 
456, 457, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 162, 199, 206, 209, 264, 276, 297, 
468, 473, 474, 475, 477, 478, 479, 308, 330, 341, 352, 385, 502. 
480, 483, 484, 487, 488, 489, 490, Durennon, intendant général du domaine 
491, 492, 495, 496, 502, 503, 504, extraordinaire , 206. 
506, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 516, Dustas, directeur des revues et de la con- 
517, 518, 522, 523, 524, 526, 527, scription militaire , 90, 94. 
528, 535, 536, 537, 538, 539, 540, Duroc, grand maréchal du palais, 175. 
542, 543, 544, 545, 546, 547, 549, Durosyet, général, 102, 429, 506. 


550. Eucins Napouton, vice-roi d’Italie, 21, 43, 
Barner, bibliothécaire de l’Empereur, 95. 86, 119, 123, 124, 131, 132, 155, 
162, 255, 398. 172, 184, 186, 194, 197, 208, 215, 


Bessitnus, maréchal, 83, 98, 99, 100, 219, 265, 281, 302, 327, 346, 370, 
188, 214, 241, 297, 299, 301, 327, 393, 458, 460, 461, 469, 481, 485, 


354, 358, 367. 496, 525. 
Bicor pe Préamensu, ministre des cultes, Ferutier, capitaine de frégate, 108. 
29, 276, 500. Francois IL, empereur d’Autriche, 358. 
Borcuess (Prince), 209, 417. Fagognic, roi de Wurtemberg, 404. 


Canpacéris , archichancelier, 109, 221. Gaupin, ministre des finances, 34, 181. 
Castiereacu (Lord), secrétaire d’Ktat pour Gouncaup, capitaine, 148. 
les affaires étrangéres, 4 Londres, 371. Havrrout (D’), capitaine, 252, 416, 519. 
Cautaincourt, grand écuyer, 101, 147. Hivouvinte, sénateur, 289. 
Cuampacny , intendant général de la Cou- Jiirda Naroutton, roi de Westphalie, 61, 
ronne, 147, 377. 90, 115, 190, 366, 435, 462, 471, 
Cuarke, ministre de la guerre, 3, 4, 5, A497, 515, 525, 546. 
6, 7,9, 16, 19, 25, 29, 39, 40, Kounaktve, ambassadeur de Russie & Paris, 
AT, A®, 54, 56,69, 74, 76,78, 79, 275. 
83, 94, 104, 105, 106, 110, 117, Lactrton, grand chancelier de la Légion 
135, 165, 174, 178, 182, 195, 197, Whonneur , 12. 


588 


Lacutz, ministre directeur de I'administra- 
tion de la guerre, 11, 59, 73, 96, 
112, 113, 125, 146, 151, 160, 165, 
184, 185, 196, 198, 200, 201, 205, 
251, 256, 290, 291, 292, 298, 312, 
326, 345, 359, 388, 452. 

Leseun (Prince), lieutenant général de 
I'Empereur en Hollande, 142, 402. 
Manet, ministre des relations extérieures , 
23, 67, 82, 93, 95, 98, 104, 117, 
132, 144, 177, 181, 192, 200, 204, 
224, 240, 273, 274, 347, 383, 384, 
385, 396, 419, 437. 

Marmont, maréchal, 220, 228. 

Mgxzt, chancelier du royaume d'Italie, 404. 


LISTE DES DESTINATAIRES. 


Misstessv, vice-amiral, 235. 

Mo.uien, ministre du trésor public , 24, 
33, 119, 131, 154, 173, 240, 403, 
348, 397. 

Moyrativer, ministre de l'intéricur, 2, 
17, 23, 29, 35, 40, 68, 83, 05, | 
133. : 

Montesquiou (Comte pg), 208. s 

Monresgurou (Comtesse pz), 46, 420, 400). 

Paapt (Baron vg), 441, 

Rwworstiar (La), général, 207, 250, 854, 
310, 377. 

Savary, ministre de la police générale, 
24, 108. 

Tatevrano (Comtesse pe), 110, 


TABLE 
DES MATIERES DU TOME XXIII. 





Pages. 

Correspondance du 42 novembre 1844 au 30 juin 1812......... , 1 
able analy gues ja: sas) 55, 3) SE Seam cigs Wied & aloe anne oe 554 
Bid DSi sess 587 


Liste des personnes qui les lettres sont adressées . . . . . 


