MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 




Joseph stalin: Marxism and 
the National Question 


Selected ST > ntings and Speeches 



INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK 



COPYRIGHT, 1942, BY 
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS CO. 

PRINTED IN THE U. S. A. 


INC. 



CONTENTS 


Marxism and the National Question 7 

Report on the National Question 69 

The Policy o£ the Soviet Government on the National 

Question in Russia 76 

Theses on the Immediate Tasks of the Party in Connection 

with the National Question 86 

Report on the Immediate Tasks of the Party in Connection 

with the National Problem 98 

New Features of the National Question in 

The Amalgamation of the Soviet Republics 118 

Theses on National Factors in the Development of the 

Party and the State 126 

Report on National Factors in the Development of the 

Party and the State 137 

Rights and “Lefts” in the National Republics and Regions 162 
Training Cadres in the National Republics and Regions 172 
The October Revolution and the Problem of the Middle 

Strata 177 

The National Question 182 

The Soviet Republics of the East 193 

The Proletarian Solution of the National Question 201 

Deviations on the National Question 203 

Deviations Towards Nationalism 215 

The National Question and the Soviet Constitution 217 




Marxism and the National Question 


The period of counter-revolution in Russia brought not only 
“thunder and lightning” in its train, but also disillusionment in the 
movement and lack of faith in common forces. As long as people 
believed in “a bright future,” they fought side by side irrespective 
of nationality: common questions first and foremost! But when 
doubt crept into people’s hearts, they began to depart, each to his 
own national tent. Every man for himself! The “national ques- 
tion” first and foremost! 

At the same time a profound upheaval was taking place in the 
economic life of the country. The year 1905 had not been in vain: 
one more blow had been struck at the survivals of serfdom in the 
country districts. The series of good harvests which succeeded the 
starvation years, and the industrial boom that followed, furthered 
the progress of capitalism. The differentiation of the peasants, the 
growth of the towns, the development of trade and means of com- 
munication — all took a big stride forward. This applied particularly 
to the border regions. And this could not but hasten the process of 
the economic consolidation of the nationalities of Russia. They 
were bound to be stirred into movement 

The “constitutional regime” which was established at that time 
also acted in the same direction of stirring up the nationalities. The 
spread of newspapers and of literature generally, a certain freedom 
of the press and of cultural institutions, an increase in the number 
of national theaters, and so forth — all unquestionably helped to 
strengthen “national sentiments.” The Duma, with its election 
campaigns and political groups, gave fresh opportunities for greater 
activity on the part of the nations and provided a new and wide 
arena for their mobilization. 


7 



8 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

And the rising tide of militant nationalism above, the series of 
repressive measures taken by the “powers that be” in vengeance on 
the border regions for their “love of freedom / 5 evoked an answer- 
ing tide of nationalism below, which at times took the form of 
crude chauvinism. The spread of Zionism among the Jews; the in- 
crease of chauvinism in Poland, and of Pan-Islanism among the 
Tatars; the spread of nationalism among the Armenians, Geor- 
gians, and Ukrainians; the general tendency of the ordinary man 
to anti-Semitism — all these are generally known facts. 

The wave of nationalism swept onward with increasing force, 
threatening to engulf the working class masses. And the more the 
movement for emancipation declined, the more plentifully na- 
tionalism pushed forth its blossoms. 

These crucial times placed a high mission upon the Social-Demo- 
cratic Party — to resist nationalism, and to protect the masses from 
the general “epidemic / 5 For the Social-Democrats, and they alone, 
could do this by bringing against nationalism the tried weapon 
of internationalism, the unity and indivisibility of the class strug- 
gle. And the more precipitately the wave of nationalism advanced, 
the louder had to be the call of the Social-Democratic Party for 
fraternity and unity among the proletarians of all the nationalities 
of Russia. Particular firmness was demanded of the Social-Demo- 
crats of the border regions, who came into direct contact with the 
nationalist movement. 

But not all the Social-Democrats proved equal to the task — and 
this applies particularly to the Social-Democrats of the border 
regions. The Bund,* which had previously laid stress on the com- 
mon aims, now began to give prominence to its own specific, purely 
nationalist purposes: it went the length of declaring the “observ- 
ance of the Sabbath 55 and the “recognition of Yiddish 55 a fighting 
issue in its election campaign . 1 The Bund was followed by the 
Caucasus; one section of the Caucasian Social-Democrats, who, 

*The Jewish Socialist organization, founded in 1897, and active mainly 
in Poland and Lithuania, collaborated with the Mensheviks both before and 
after the October Revolution. — Ed, 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 9 

like all the Caucasian Social-Democrats had formerly rejected 
“national cultural autonomy,” were now making it an immediate 
demand . 2 We shall not dwell on the conference of the Liquidators, 
which in a diplomatic way gave its sanction to nationalist vacilla- 
tions.* 

But from all this it follows that the views of the Russian Social- 
Democratic Party on the national question are not yet clear to all 
Social-Democrats. It is evident that a serious and comprehensive 
discussion of the national question is required. Consistent Social- 
Democrats must work solidly and indefatigably against the na- 
tionalist obfuscation, no matter from what quarter it proceeds. 

L A NATION 


What is a nation? 

A nation is primarily a community, a definite community of 
people. 

This community is not racial, nor is it tribal. The modern Italian 
nation was formed from Romans, Teutons, Etruscans, Greeks, 
Arabs, and so forth. The French nation was formed from Gauls, 
Romans, Britons, Teutons, and so on. The same should be said of 
the British, the Germans, and others, who were formed into nations 
from peoples of different races and tribes. 

Thus, a nation is not a racial or tribal, but a historically consti- 
tuted community of people. 

On the other hand, the great empires of Cyrus and Alexander 
unquestionably could not be called nations, although they came to 
be constituted historically and were formed out of different tribes 
and races. They were not nations, but casual and loosely-connected 
conglomerations of groups, which fell apart or came together de- 
pending upon the victories or defeats of this or that conqueror. 

Thus, a nation is not a casual or ephemeral conglomeration, but 
a stable community of people. 

* See History of the Communist "Party of the Soviet Union, New York, 
1939, PP- 136 - 38 .— Ed. 



10 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

But not every stable community constitutes a nation. Austria and 
Russia are also stable communities, but nobody calls them nations. 
What distinguishes a national community from a political com- 
munity? One of the distinguishing features is that a national com- 
munity is inconceivable without a common language, while a state 
need not necessarily have a common language. The Czech nation 
in Austria and the Polish in Russia would be impossible if each 
did not have a common language, whereas the integrity of Russia 
and Austria is not affected by the fact that there are several differ- 
ent languages within their borders. We are referring, of course, 
to the colloquial language of the people and not to the official gov- 
ernment language. 

Thus community of language is one of the characteristic features 
of a nation. 

This, of course, does not mean that different nations always and 
everywhere necessarily speak different languages, or that all who 
speak one language necessarily constitute one nation. A common 
language for every nation, but not necessarily different languages 
for different nations. There is no nation which at one and the same 
time speaks several languages, but this does not mean that there 
may not be two nations speaking the same language. Englishmen 
and Americans speak one language, but they do not constitute one 
nation. The same is true of the Norwegians and the Danes, the 
English and the Irish. 

But why, for instance, do not the English and the Americans 
constitute one nation in spite of their common language? 

First, because they do not live together, but inhabit different ter- 
ritories. A nation is formed only as a result of lengthy and system- 
atic intercourse, as a result of the fact that people live together from 
generation to generation. But people cannot live together for 
lengthy periods unless they have a common territory. Englishmen 
and Americans originally inhabited the same territory, England, 
and constituted one nation. Later, one section of the English emi- 
grated from England to a new territory, America, and here, in the 
new territory, in the course of time came to form the new American 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION II 

nation. Difference of territory led to the formation of different 
nations. 

Thus community of territory is one of the characteristic features 
of a nation. 

But this is not all. Community of territory in itself does not create 
a nation. This requires, in addition, an internal economic bond 
which welds the various parts of a nation into a single whole. There 
is no such bond between England and America, and so they con- 
stitute two different nations. But the Americans themselves would 
not be called a nation were not the different parts of America bound 
together into an economic whole, as a result of division of labor 
between them, the development of means of communication, and 
so forth. 

Take the Georgians, for instance. The Georgians before the Re- 
form # inhabited a common territory and spoke one language. 
Nevertheless, they did not, strictly speaking, constitute one nation, 
for, being split up into a number of disconnected principalities, they 
could not share a common economic life; for centuries they waged 
war and pillaged each other by inciting the Persians and Turks 
against each other. The ephemeral and accidental amalgamation 
of the principalities which some successful king sometimes man- 
aged to bring about affected at best a superficial administrative 
sphere and rapidly disintegrated owing to the caprices of the 
princes and the indifference of the peasants. Nor could it be other- 
wise in economically disunited Georgia. Georgia came onto the 
scene as a nation only in the latter half of the nineteenth century, 
when the fall of serfdom and the growth of the economic life of 
the country, the development of means of communication and the 
rise of capitalism, instituted a division of labor among the various 
districts of Georgia, completely shattered the economic self-suffi- 
ciency of the principalities, and bound them together into a single 
whole. 

The same must be said of the other nations which have passed 
through the stage of feudalism and have developed capitalism. 

* The abolition of serfdom in 1861. — Ed. 



12 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Thus community of economic life, economic cohesion, is one of 
the characteristic features of a nation. 

But even this is not all. Apart from the foregoing, one must take 
into consideration the specific spiritual complexion of the people 
constituting a nation. Nations differ not only in their conditions 
of life, but also in spiritual complexion, which manifests itself in 
peculiarities of national culture. If England, America, and Ireland, 
which speak one language, nevertheless constitute three distinct 
nations, it is in no small measure due to the peculiar psychological 
make-up which they developed from generation to generation as a 
result of dissimilar conditions of existence. 

Of course, by itself the psychological make-up, or, as it is other- 
wise called, the “national character,” is something indefinable to 
the observer, but inasmuch as it manifests itself in a distinctive 
culture common to the nation it is definable and cannot be ignored. 

Needless to say, “national character” is not a thing that is fixed 
once and for all, but is modified by changes in the conditions of 
life; but since it exists at every given moment, it leaves its imprint 
on the physiognomy of the nation. 

Thus community of psychological mahe-up, which manifests it- 
self in a community of culture, is one of the characteristic features 
of a nation. 

We have now exhausted the characteristic features of a nation. 

A nation is a historically evolved, stable community of language, 
territory, economic life, and psychological mahe-up manifested in 
a community of culture . 

It goes without saying that a nation, like every other historical 
phenomenon, is subject to the law of change, has its history, its 
beginning and end. 

It must be emphasized that none of the above characteristics is 
by itself sufficient to define a nation. On the other hand, it is suffi- 
cient for a single one of these characteristics to be absent and the 
nation ceases to be a nation. 

It is possible to conceive of people possessing a common “na- 
tional character,” but they cannot be said to constitute a single 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 13 

nation if they are economically disunited, inhabit different terri- 
tories, speak different languages, and so forth. Such, for instance, 
are the Russian, Galician, American, Georgian, and Caucasian 
Highland Jews, who do not, in our opinion, constitute a single 
nation. 

It is possible to conceive of people with a common territory and 
economic life who nevertheless would not constitute a single nation 
because they have no common language and no common “national 
character.” Such, for instance, are the Germans and Letts in the 
Baltic region. 

Finally, the Norwegians and the Danes speak one language, but 
they do not constitute a single nation owing to the absence of the 
other characteristics. 

It is only when all these characteristics are present that we have 
a nation. 

It might appear that “national character” is not one of the char- 
acteristics but the only essential characteristic of a nation, and that 
all the other characteristics are only factors in the development of 
a nation, rather than its characteristics. Such, for instance, is the 
view held by Rudolph Springer, and particularly by Otto Bauer, 
Social-Democratic theoreticians on the national question, well 
known in Austria. 

Let us examine their theory of nations. According to Springer: 
“A nation is a union of similarly thinking and similarly speaking 
persons. [It is] a cultural community of modern people no longer 
tied to the soil ” 3 (Our italics — JS.) 

Thus, a “union” of similarly thinking people speaking one lan- 
guage, no matter how disunited they may be, no matter where they 
live, is a nation. 

Bauer goes even further. 

What is a nation? [he asks.] Is it community of language which 
makes people a nation? But the English and the Irish . . . speak the 
same language without, however, being one people; the Jews have 
no common language and yet are a nation . 4 



14 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

What, then, is a nation? “A nation is a relative community of 
character.” 5 

But what is character, in this case national character? National 
character is . . the sum total of characteristics which distinguish 
the people of one nationality from the people of another nationality 
— the complex of physical and spiritual characteristics which dis- 
tinguish one nation from another .” 6 

Bauer knows, of course, that national character does not fall from 
the skies, and he therefore adds: 

The character of people is determined by nothing so much as by 

their fate A nation is nothing but a community of fate [which 

in its turn is determined] by the conditions under which people pro- 
duce their means of subsistence and distribute the products of their 
labor/ 

We thus arrive at the “fullest,” as Bauer calls it, definition of a 
nation: “A nation is the aggregate of people bound into a com- 
munity of character by a community of fate.” 8 

We thus have a community of national character based on a 
community of fate and not necessarily connected with community 
of territory, language, or economic life. 

But what in that case remains of the nation? What national 
community can there be among people who are economically dis- 
connected, inhabit different territories, and from generation to 
generation speak different languages? 

Bauer speaks of the Jews as a nation, although they “have no 
common language ”; 9 but what “community of fate” and national 
cohesion can there be, for instance, between the Georgian, Daghes- 
tanian, Russian, and American Jews, who are completely disunited, 
inhabit different territories, and speak different languages? 

These Jews undoubtedly lead the same economic and political 
life as the Georgians, Daghestanians, Russians and Americans re- 
spectively, and in the same cultural atmosphere as the latter; this 
cannot but leave a definite impress on their national character; if 
there is anything common to them left it is their religion, their com- 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 1 5 

mon origin, and certain relics of national character. All this is be- 
yond question. But how can it be seriously maintained that petrified 
religious rites and fading psychological relics affect the “fate” of 
these Jews more powerfully than the living social, economic, and 
cultural environment that surrounds them? And it is only on this 
assumption that it is generally possible to speak of the Jews as a 
single nation. 

What, then, distinguishes Bauer’s nation from the mystical and 
self-contained “national spirit” of the spiritualists ? 

Bauer, by divorcing the “distinctive feature” of nations (national 
character) from the “conditions” of their life, sets up an impassable 
barrier between them. But what is national character if not a re- 
flection of the conditions of life, a coagulation of impressions de- 
rived from environment? How can one limit the matter to na- 
tional character alone, isolating and divorcing it from the soil that 
gave rise to it ? 

Indeed, what distinguished the English nation from the Amer- 
ican nation at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the 
nineteenth centuries, when the United States was still known as 
New England? Not national character, of course; for the Amer- 
icans had originated from England and had brought with them to 
America not only the English language, but also the English na- 
tional character, which, of course, they could not lose so soon; 
although, under the influence of the new conditions, they would 
naturally be developing their own specific character. Yet, despite 
this greater or lesser community of character, at that time they 
already constituted a nation distinct from England. Obviously, 
New England as a nation differed from England as a nation not 
by its specific national character, or not so much by its national 
character, as by its environment and conditions of life, which were 
distinct from those of England. 

It is therefore clear that there is in fact no single distinguishing 
characteristic of a nation. There is only a sum total of character- 
istics, of which, when nations are compared, one characteristic 
(national character), or another (language), or a third (territory, 



1 6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

economic conditions), stands out in sharper relief. A nation con- 
stitutes the combination of all these characteristics taken together. 

Bauer’s point of view, which identifies a nation with its national 
character, divorces the nation from its soil and converts it into 
an invisible, self-contained force. The result is not a living and 
active nation, but something mystical, intangible, and supernatural. 
For, I repeat, what sort of nation, for instance, is a Jewish nation 
that consists of Georgian, Daghestanian, Russian, American, and 
other Jews, the members of which do not understand each other 
(since they speak different languages), inhabit different parts of 
the globe, will never see each other, will never act together, whether 
in time of peace or in time of war? No, it is not for such paper 
“nations” that the Social-Democratic Party draws up its national 
program. It can reckon only with real nations, which act and move, 
and therefore insist on being reckoned with. 

Bauer is obviously confusing nation , which is a historical cate- 
gory, with tribe , which is an ethnographical category. 

Bauer himself apparently feels the weakness of his position. 
While in the beginning of his book he definitely declares the Jews 
to be a nation, 10 he corrects himself at the end of the book and states 
that “in general, capitalist society makes it impossible for them 
[the Jews] to continue as a nation,” 11 by causing them to assimilate 
with other nations. The reason, it appears, is that “the Jews have 
no closed territory of settlement,” 12 while the Czechs, for instance, 
have such a territory and, according to Bauer, will survive as a 
nation. In short, the reason lies in the absence of territory. 

By arguing thus, Bauer wanted to prove that the Jewish workers 
cannot demand national autonomy, 13 but he thereby inadvertently 
refuted his own theory, which denies that community of territory 
is one of the characteristics of a nation. 

But Bauer goes further. In the beginning of his book he definitely 
declares that “the Jews have no common language, and neverthe- 
less are a nation.” 14 But hardly has he reached page 126 when he 
effects a change of front and just as definitely declares that unques- 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 1 7 

tionably, “no nation is possible without a common language ? 15 
(Our italics. — JS.) 

Bauer wanted to prove that “language is the most important 
instrument of human intercourse/ 5 16 but at the same time he in- 
advertently proved something he did not mean to prove, namely, 
the groundlessness of his own theory of nations, which denies the 
significance of community of language. 

Thus this theory, stitched together by idealistic threads, refutes 
itself. 


II. THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT 

A nation is not merely a historical category but a historical 
category belonging to a definite epoch, the epoch of rising capital- 
ism. The process of elimination of feudalism and development of 
capitalism was at the same time a process of amalgamation of 
people into nations. Such, for instance, was the case in Western 
Europe. The British, French, Germans, Italians, and others formed 
themselves into nations at the time of the victorious advance of 
capitalism and its triumph over feudal disunity. 

But the formation of nations in these instances at the same time 
signified their conversion into independent national states. The 
British, French, and other nations are at the same time British, 
French, and other states. Ireland, which did not participate in this 
process, does not alter the general picture. 

Matters proceeded somewhat differently in Eastern Europe. 
While in the West the nations developed into states, in the East 
multi-national states were formed, each consisting of several na- 
tionalities. Such for example are Austria-Hungary and Russia. In 
Austria, the Germans proved to be politically the most developed, 
and they took it upon themselves to amalgamate the Austrian 
nationalities into a state. In Hungary, the most adapted for state 
organization were the Magyars — the kernel of the Hungarian na- 
tionalities — and it was they who united Hungary. In Russia, the 
role of welder of nationalities was assumed by the Great-Russians, 
who were headed by an aristocratic military bureaucracy, which 



1 8 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

had been historically formed and was powerful and well-organized. 

Such was the case in the East. 

This peculiar method of formation of states could take place 
only where feudalism had not yet been eliminated, where capital- 
ism was feebly developed, where the nationalities which had been 
forced into the background had not yet been able to consolidate 
themselves economically into integral nations. 

But capitalism also began to develop in the Eastern states. Trade 
and means of communication were developing. Large towns were 
springing up. The nations were becoming economically consoli- 
dated. Capitalism, erupting into the tranquil life of the ousted 
nationalities, was arousing them and stirring them into action. The 
development of the press and the theater, the activity of the Reichs- 
rat (Austria) and of the Duma (Russia) were helping to strengthen 
“national sentiments.” The intelligentsia that had arisen was being 
imbued with “the national idea” and was acting in the same 
manner — 

But the ousted nations, aroused to independent life, could no 
longer shape themselves into independent national states; they 
encountered the powerful resistance of the ruling strata of the 
dominant nations, which had long ago assumed the control of the 
state. They were too late! 

In this way the Czechs, Poles, and others, formed themselves into 
nations in Austria; the Croats, and others in Hungary; the Letts, 
Lithuanians, Ukranians, Georgians, Armenians, and so forth, in 
Russia. What had been an exception in Western Europe (Ireland) 
became the rule in the East. 

In the West, Ireland responded to its exceptional position by a 
national movement. In the East, the awakened nations were bound 
to respond in the same fashion. 

Thus arose the circumstances which impelled the young nations 
of Eastern Europe into the path of struggle. The struggle began 
and spread, to be sure, not between nations as a whole but between 
the ruling classes of the dominant and the ousted nations. The 
struggle is usually conducted by the urban petty bourgeoisie of the 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 19 

oppressed nation against the big bourgeoisie of the dominant na- 
tion (Czechs and Germans), or by the rural bourgeoisie of the op- 
pressed nation against the landlords of the dominant nation 
(Ukrainians in Poland), or by the whole “national” bourgeoisie of 
the oppressed nations against the ruling nobility of the dominant 
nation (Poland, Lithuania, and the Ukraine in Russia), 

The bourgeoisie plays the leading role. 

The chief problem for the young bourgeoisie is the problem of 
the market. Its aim is to sell its goods and to emerge victorious 
from competition with the bourgeoisie of another nationality. 
Hence its desire to secure its “own,” its “home” market. The mar- 
ket is the first school in which the bourgeoisie learns its nationalism. 

But matters are usually not confined to the market. The semi- 
feudal, semi-bourgeois bureaucracy of the dominant nation inter- 
venes in the struggle with its own methods of “arresting and pre- 
venting.” # The bourgeoisie of the dominant nation, whether large 
or small, is able to deal more rapidly and decisively with its com- 
petitors. Forces are united and a series of restrictive measures are 
put into operation against the alien bourgeoisie, measures passing 
into acts of repression. The struggle passes from the economic 
sphere to the political sphere. Limitation of freedom of movement, 
repression of language, limitation of franchise, restriction of schools, 
religious limitations, and so on are piled onto the head of the com- 
petitor. Of course, such measures are designed not only in the 
interest of the bourgeois classes of the dominant nation, but also in 
pursuit of the specifically caste aims, so to speak, of the ruling 
bureaucracy. But from the point of view of the results achieved this 
is quite immaterial: the bourgeois classes and the bureaucracy in 
this matter go hand in hand — whether it be in Austria-Hungary or 
in Russia. 

The bourgeoisie of the oppressed nation, repressed on every 
hand, is naturally stirred into movement. It appeals to its native folk 
and begins to cry out about the fatherland, claiming that its own 

* A rather free translation of the satirical description of the functions of 
the police by the Russian writer Gleb Uspensky. — Ed . 



20 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

cause is the cause of the nation as a whole. It recruits itself an army 
from among its countrymen in the interests of . . . the fatherland. 
Nor do the folk always remain unresponsive to its appeals; they 
rally around its banner : the repression from above affects them also 
and provokes their discontent. 

Thus the national movement begins. 

The strength of the national movement is determined by the 
degree to which the wide strata of the nation, the proletariat and 
peasantry, participate in it. 

Whether the proletariat rallies to the banner of bourgeois na- 
tionalism depends on the degree of development of class contra- 
dictions, on the class consciousness and degree of organization of 
the proletariat. A class-conscious proletariat has its own tried 
banner, and it does not need to march under the banner of the 
bourgeoisie. 

As far as the peasants are concerned, their participation in the 
national movement depends primarily on the character of the re- 
pression. If the repression affects the “land,” as was the case in 
Ireland, then the mass of the peasants immediately rally to the 
banner of the national movement. 

On the other hand, if, for example, there Is no serious anti- 
Russian nationalism in Georgia, it is primarily because there are 
no Russian landlords there or a Russian big bourgeoisie to supply 
the fuel for such nationalism among the masses. In Georgia there 
is anti-Armenian nationalism; but this is because there is an 
Armenian big bourgeoisie there which, beating the small and still 
unconsolidated Georgian bourgeoisie, drives the latter to anti- 
Armenian nationalism. 

Depending on these factors, the national movement either as- 
sumes a mass character and steadily grows (as in Ireland and 
Galicia), or it is converted into a series of petty collisions, de- 
generating Into squabbles and fights over signboards (as in some 
of the towns of Bohemia) . 

The nature of the national movement will not everywhere be 
the same: it is wholly determined by the diverse demands made by 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 21 

the movement. In Ireland the movement bears an agrarian char- 
acter; in Bohemia it is concerned with language; in one place the 
demand is for civil equality and religious freedom, in another for 
the nation’s own officials or its own assembly. The diversity of de- 
mands not infrequently reveals the diverse features which charac- 
terize a nation in general (language, territory, etc.) It is worthy 
of note that we never meet with a demand connected with Bauer’s 
all-embracing “national character.” And this is natural : “national 
character” in itself is something elusive, and, as was correctly re- 
marked by J. Strasser, “what can be done with it in politics?” 17 

Such, in general, are the forms and features of the national 
movement. 

From what has been said it will be clear that the national strug- 
gle under the conditions of rising capitalism is a struggle of the 
bourgeois classes among themselves. Sometimes the bourgeoisie 
succeeds in drawing the proletariat into the national movement, 
and then the national struggle externally assumes a nationwide 
character. But this is so only externally. In its essence it is always 
a bourgeois struggle, one that is chiefly favorable to and suitable 
for the bourgeoisie. 

But it does not follow from this that the proletariat should not 
put up a fight against the policy of national oppression. 

Limitation of freedom of movement, disfranchisement, suppres- 
sion of language, restriction of schools, and other forms of repres- 
sion affect the workers no less, if not more, than the bourgeoisie. 
Such a state of affairs can only serve to retard the free development 
of the intellectual forces of the proletariat of subject nations. There 
can be no possibility of a full development of the intellectual fac- 
ulties of the Tatar or of the Jewish worker if he is not allowed to 
use his native language at meetings and lectures, and if his schools 
are closed down. 

The policy of national repression is dangerous to the cause of the 
proletariat also on another account. It diverts the attention of large 
strata of the population from social questions, questions of the 
class struggle, to national questions, questions “common to the 



22 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

proletariat and the bourgeoisie. And this creates a favorable soil 
for lying propaganda regarding “harmony of interests,” for the 
glossing over of the class interests of the proletariat, and for the in- 
tellectual enslavement of the workers. This creates a serious ob- 
stacle to the work of uniting the workers of all nationalities. If a 
considerable proportion of the Polish workers are still in intellect- 
ual bondage to die bourgeois nationalists, if they still stand aloof 
from the international labor movement, it is chiefly because the 
age-long anti-Polish policy of the “powers that be” creates the soil 
for, and hinders the emancipation of the workers from, this bond- 
age. 

But the policy of repression does not stop here. Not infrequently 
it passes from a “system” of oppression to a “system” of inciting 
nations against each other, to a “system” of massacres and pogroms. 
Of course, the latter is not everywhere and always possible, but 
where it is possible — in the absence of elementary civil rights — it 
frequently assumes horrifying proportions and threatens to drown 
the cause of unity of the workers in blood and tears. The Caucasus 
and South Russia furnish numerous examples. “Divide and rule” 
—such is the purpose of the policy of inciting nations against each 
other. And where such a policy succeeds it is a tremendous evil for 
the proletariat and a serious obstacle to the work of uniting the 
workers of all the nationalities in the state. 

But the workers are interested in the complete amalgamation of 
all their comrades into a single international army, in their speedy 
and final emancipation from intellectual subjection to the bour- 
geoisie, and in the full and free development of the intellectual 
forces of their brothers, whatever the nation to which they belong. 

The workers therefore combat and will continue to combat the 
policy of national oppression in all its forms, subtle or crude, as 
well as the policy of inciting nations against each other in all its 
forms. 

Social-Democratic parties in all countries therefore proclaim the 
right of nations to self-determination. 

The right of self-determination means that only the nation itself 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 23 

has the right to determine its destiny, that no one has the right 
forcibly to interfere in the life of the nation, to destroy its schools 
and other institutions, to violate its habits and customs, to repress 
its language, or curtail its rights. 

This, of course, does not mean that Social-Democrats will sup- 
port every custom and institution of a nation. While combating the 
exercise of violence against any nation, they will only support the 
right of the nation to determine its own destiny, at the same time 
agitating against the noxious customs and institutions of that na- 
tion in order to enable the toiling strata of the nation to emancipate 
themselves from them. 

The right of self-determination means that a nation can arrange 
its life according to its own will. It has the right to arrange its life 
on the basis of autonomy. It has the right to enter into federal 
relations with other nations. It has the right to complete secession. 
Nations are sovereign and all nations are equal. 

This, of course, does not mean that Social-Democrats will sup- 
port every demand of a nation. A nation has the right even to 
return to the old order of things; but this does not mean that 
Social-Democrats will subscribe to such a decision if taken by any 
institution of the said nation. The obligations of Social-Democrats 
who defend the interests of the proletariat, and the rights of a 
nation, which consists of various classes, are two different things. 

In fighting for the right of nations to self-determination, the 
aim of the Social-Democrats is to put an end to the policy of na- 
tional oppression, to render it impossible, and thereby to remove 
the grounds of hostility between nations, to take the edge off that 
hostility and reduce it to a minimum. 

This is what essentially distinguishes the policy of the class- 
conscious proletariat from the policy of the bourgeoisie, which 
attempts to aggravate and fan the national struggle and to prolong 
and sharpen the national movement. 

And this is why the class-conscious proletariat cannot rally 
around the “national” flag of the bourgeoisie. 

This is why the so-called “evolutionary national” policy advo- 



24 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

cated by Bauer cannot become the policy of the proletariat. Bauer’s 
attempt to identify his “evolutionary national” policy with the 
policy of the “modern working class” 18 is an attempt to adapt the 
class struggle of the workers to the struggle of the nations. 

The fate of the national movement, which is essentially a bour- 
geois movement, is naturally connected with the fate of the bour- 
geoisie. The final collapse of the national movement is possible 
only with the collapse of the bourgeoisie. Only under the reign of 
socialism can peace be fully established. But even within the frame- 
work of capitalism it is possible to reduce the national struggle to 
a minimum, to sever its roots, to render it as innocuous as possible 
for the proletariat. This is borne out by the examples of Switzer- 
land and America. It requires that the country should be democ- 
ratized and the nations allowed opportunity for free development. 

III. THE PRESENTATION OF THE PROBLEM 

A nation has the right freely to determine its own destiny. It has 
the right to arrange its life as it sees fit, without of course stamping 
on the rights of other nations. That is beyond dispute. 

But how exactly should it arrange its own life, what forms should 
its future constitution take, if the interests of the majority of the 
nation and, above all, of the proletariat, are to be borne in mind ? 

A nation has the right to arrange its life on autonomous lines. 
It even has the right to secede. But this does not mean that it 
should do so under all circumstances, that autonomy, or separation, 
will everywhere and always be advantageous for a nation, for the 
majority of its population, for the toiling strata. The Transcau- 
casian Tatars as a nation may assemble, let us say, in their Diet 
and, succumbing to the influence of their beys and mullahs, decide 
to restore the old order of things and to secede from the state. 
According to the meaning of the clause on self-determination they 
are fully entitled to do so. But will this be in the interest of the 
toiling strata of the Tatar nation? Can Social-Democrats remain 
indifferent when the beys and mullahs take the lead of the masses 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 25 

in the solution of the national problem ? Should not Social-Demo- 
crats interfere in the matter and influence the will of the nation 
in a definite way? Should they not come forward with a definite 
plan for the solution of the problem which would be most ad- 
vantageous to the Tatar masses? 

But what solution would be most compatible with the interests 
of the toiling masses? Autonomy, federation, or separation? All 
these are problems the solution to which will depend on the con- 
crete historical conditions in which the given nation finds itself. 
Nay, more. Conditions, like everything else, change, and a decision 
which is correct at one particular time may prove to be entirely 
unsuitable at another. 

In the middle of the nineteenth century Marx was in favor of 
the separation of Russian Poland; and he was right, for it was 
then a question of emancipating a higher culture from a lower 
culture that was destroying it. And the question at that time was 
not only a theoretical question, an academic question, but a prac- 
tical question, a question of actual reality 

At the end of the nineteenth century the Polish Marxists were 
already declaring against the separation of Poland; and they were 
also right, for during the fifty years that had elapsed profound 
changes had taken place, bringing Russia and Poland closer eco- 
nomically and culturally. Moreover, during this period the ques- 
tion of separation had been converted from a practical matter into 
a matter for academic dispute, which excited nobody except per- 
haps the intellectuals abroad. This, of course, by no means pre- 
cludes the possibility that certain internal and external conditions 
may arise in which the question of the separation of Poland may 
again become actual. 

It follows from this that the solution of the national problem 
can be arrived at only if due consideration is paid to historical 
conditions in their development. 

The economic, pohtical, and cultural conditions of a given 
nation constitute the only key to the question of how a particular 
nation ought to arrange its life and what forms its future consti- 



2 6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

tution ought to take. It is possible that a specific solution of the 
problem will be required for each nation. If, indeed, a dialectical 
approach to a question is required anywhere it is required here 
in the national question. 

In view of this we must declare our decided opposition to a 
certain very widespread, but very summary manner of solving 
the national problem, which owes its inception to the Bund. We 
have in mind the easy method of referring to the Austrian and 
South Slavic * Social-Democratic parties, which supposedly have 
already solved the national problem and whose solution the Rus- 
sian Social-Democrats should simply borrow. It is assumed that 
whatever, say, is right for Austria is also right for Russia. The 
most important and decisive factor is lost sight of here— -the con- 
crete historical conditions in Russia as a whole and in the life of 
each of the nations inhabiting Russia in particular. 

Listen to what the well-known Bundist, V. Kossovsky, says: 

When at the Fourth Congress of the Bund the principles of the 
question [the national question— J.S.] were discussed, the proposal 
made by one of the members of the congress to setde the question in 
the spirit of the resolution of the South-Slavic Social-Democratic 
Party met with general approval. 19 

And the result was that “the congress unanimously adopted” 
national autonomy. 

And that was all! No analysis of the actual conditions in Rus- 
sia, no investigation of the conditions of life of the Jews in 
Russia. First, they borrowed the solution of the South-Slavic 
Social-Democratic Party, then they approved it, and finally they 
unanimously adopted it! This is the way the Bund presents and 
solves the national problem in Russia 

As a matter of fact, Austria and Russia represent entirely dif- 
ferent conditions. This explains why the Social-Democrats in 
Austria when they adopted their national program at Briinn 

* The South-Slavic Social-Democratic Party in the Southern part of 
Austria. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION IT] 

(1899) in the spirit of the resolution of the South-Slavic Social- 
Democratic Party (with certain insignificant amendments, it is 
true) approached the problem in, so to speak, an entirely non- 
Russian way and, of course, solved it in a non-Russian way. 

First, as to the presentation of the problem. How is the problem 
presented by the Austrian theoreticians of national autonomy, 
the commentators on the Briinn national program and the reso- 
lution of the South-Slavic Social-Democratic Party, Springer and 
Bauer? 

Springer declares: 

Whether a state of nationalities is possible, and whether, in par- 
ticular, the Austrian nationalities are obliged to established a single 
political entity, is a preliminary question which we shall not answer 
here but shall assume to be settled. For anyone who will not concede 
this possibility and necessity, our investigation will, of course, be 
purposeless. 

Our theme is as follows: inasmuch as these nations are obliged to 
carry on a joint existence, what legal forms are relatively best for this 
purpose? 20 

Thus, the point of departure is the political integrity of Austria. 

Bauer says the same thing: 

We therefore first assume that the Austrian nations will remain in 
the same political union in which they exist together at the present 
time, and inquire how the nations within this union will arrange 
their relations among themselves and to the state. 21 

Here again the first thing is the integrity of Austria. 

Can the Russian Social-Democratic Party present the question 
in this way? No, it cannot. And it cannot because from the very 
outset it holds the view of the right of self-determination of 
nations, by virtue of which a nation enjoys the right of secession. 
Even the Bundist Goldblatt admitted at the Second Congress of 
the Russian Social-Democratic Party that the latter could not 
abandon the standpoint of self-determination. This is what Gold- 
blatt said on that occasion: 



28 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Nothing can be said against the right of self-determination. If 
any nation is striving for independence, we must not oppose it. If 
Poland does not wish to enter into “lawful wedlock’’ with Russia, it 
is not for us to interfere with her. 

All that is true. But it follows that the basic starting points of 
the Austrian and Russian Social-Democrats, far from being iden- 
tical, are diametrically opposite. After this, can there be any ques- 
tion of borrowing the national program of the Austrians ? 

Furthermore, the Austrians hope to achieve the “freedom of 
nationalities” by means of petty reforms, by slow steps. While 
they propose national autonomy as a practical measure, they do 
not count on a radical change, on a democratic movement for 
liberation, which they do not even contemplate. The Russian 
Marxists, on the other hand, associate the “freedom of nationali- 
ties” with a probable radical change and a democratic movement 
for liberation, having no grounds for counting on reforms. And 
this essentially alters matters in regard to the probable fate of the 
nations of Russia. 

Of course [says Bauer] there is litde probability that national 
autonomy will be the result of a great decision, of a bold action. Aus- 
tria will develop towards national autonomy step by step by a 

slow process of development and in the course of a severe struggle, 
as a result of which legislation and administration will be in a 
chronic state of paralysis. The new constitution will not be created 
by a great legislative act, but by a multitude of individual enact- 
ments for individual provinces and individual communities . 22 

Springer says the same thing. He writes: 

I am very well aware that institutions of this kind [organs of na- 
tional autonomy — J.S . ] are not created in a single year or a single 
decade. The reorganization of the Prussian administration alone de- 
manded considerable time. . . . The Prussians required two decades 
for the final establishment of their basic administrative institutions. 
Let nobody think that I entertain any illusions as to the time required 
and the difficulties to be overcome in Austria . 23 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 2 $ 

All this is very definite. But can the Russian Marxists avoid 
associating the national question with “bold actions”? Can they 
calculate on partial reforms, on “a multitude of individual enact- 
ments” as a means for achieving the “freedom of nationalities”? 
But if they cannot and must not do so, is it not clear from this 
that the methods of struggle of the Austrians and the Russians 
and their prospects must be entirely different? How in such a 
state of affairs can they confine themselves to the one-sided, milk- 
and-water national autonomy of the Austrians? One or the other: 
either those who are in favor of borrowing do not count on “bold 
actions,” or they do count on such actions but “know not T , 'hat 
they do.” 

Finally, the immediate tasks facing Russia and Austria are en- 
tirely different and dictate different methods of solving the 
national problem. Parliamentarism prevails in Austria: under 
present conditions, no development in Austria is possible without 
a parliament. But parliamentary life and legislation in Austria are 
frequently brought to a complete standstill by severe conflicts be- 
tween the national parties. This also explains the chronic political 
crisis from which Austria has for a long time been suffering. 
Hence, in Austria the national problem is the very hub of political 
life; it is the vital problem. It is therefore not surprising that the 
Austrian Social-Democratic politicians should, first of all, try in 
one way or another to find a solution for these national conflicts — 
of course on the basis of the existing parliamentary system, by par- 
liamentary methods 

Not so with Russia. In the first place, in Russia “there is no par- 
liament, thank God.” * In the second place — and this is the main 
thing — the hub of the political life of Russia is not the national but 
the agrarian problem. Consequently, the fate of the Russian prob- 
lem, and accordingly the “liberation” of nations too, is bound up 
in Russia with the solution of the agrarian problem, with the de- 
struction of the relics of serfdom, with the democratization of the 

* Words uttered by V. Kokovtsov, the tsarist Minister of Finance in the 
State Duma on April 24, 1908. — Ed. 



30 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

country. This explains why in Russia the national problem is not 
an independent and decisive problem, but a part o£ the general 
and more important problem of the emancipation of the country. 

The barrenness of the Austrian parliament [writes Springer] is 
due precisely to the fact that every reform gives rise to contradictions 
within the national parties which may affect their unity. The leaders 
of the parties, therefore, avoid everything that smacks of reform. 
Progress in Austria is generally conceivable only if the nations are 
granted indefeasible legal rights which will relieve them of the ne- 
cessity of constantly maintaining national militant groups in parlia- 
ment and will enable them to turn their attention to the solution of 
economic and social problems . 24 

Bauer says the same thing: 

National peace is firstly indispensable for the state. The state can- 
not permit legislation to be brought to a standstill by a stupid ques- 
tion of language or by every quarrel between excited people on the 
linguistic frontier, or by every new school . 25 

All this is clear. But it is no less clear that the national question 
in Russia is on an entirely different plane. It is not the national but 
the agrarian question that will decide the fate of progress in Rus- 
sia; the national question is a subordinate question. 

And so we have different presentations of the problem, different 
prospects and methods of struggle, different immediate tasks. Is it 
not clear that, such being the state of affairs, only pedants who 
solve the national problem without reference to space and time 
can think of taking an example from Austria or of borrowing 
programs? 

Once ag ain, the concrete historical conditions as the starting 
point, the dialectical presentation of the problem as the only cor- 
rect way of presenting it— such is the key to the national problem. 

IV. NATIONAL AUTONOMY 

We spoke above of the formal aspect of the Austrian national 
program and of the methodological considerations which prevent 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 3 1 

the Russian Marxists from simply borrowing the example of the 
Austrian Social-Democrats and from making their program their 
own. 

Let us now examine the program itself. 

What is the national program of the Austrian Social-Demo- 
crats? 

It is expressed in two words: national autonomy. 

That means, first, that autonomy is granted, let us say, not to 
Bohemia or Poland, which are inhabited mainly by Czechs and 
Poles, but to Czechs and Poles generally, irrespective of territory, 
no matter what part of Austria they inhabit. 

That is why this autonomy is called national and not territorial. 

It means, secondly, that the Czechs, Poles, Germans, and so on, 
scattered over the various parts of Austria, taken personally, as 
individuals, are to be organized into integral nations, and as such 
to form part of die Austrian state. In this way Austria will repre- 
sent not a union of autonomous regions, but a union of autono- 
mous nationalities, constituted irrespective of territory. 

It means, thirdly, that the national institutions which are to be 
created for this purpose for the Poles, Czechs, and so forth, are to 
have jurisdiction only over “cultural,” not “political” questions. 
Specifically political questions will be left to the Pan-Austrian 
parliament (the Reichsrat) . 

That is why this autonomy is called cultural , national cultural 
autonomy. 

And here is the text of the program adopted by the Austrian 
Social-Democratic Party at the Briinn Congress in 1899.'* 

Having referred to the fact that “national dissension in Austria 
is hindering political progress,” that “the final solution of the na- 
tional problem ... is above all a cultural demand,” and that this 
final solution “is possible only in a genuinely democratic society, 

* This program was also supported by the vote of the South-Slavic Social- 
Democratic Party. ( Cf . V erhandlungen des Gesamtparteitages der Sozial- 
demo\ratie in Oesterreich abgehalten zu Brunn . Proceedings of the Briinn 
Social-Democratic Party Congress, Vienna, 1899, pp. xiv and 104.) 



32 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

constructed on the basis of universal, direct, and equal suffrage/ 5 
the program goes on to say: 

The preservation and development of the national peculiarities * 
of the peoples of Austria is possible only on the basis of equal rights 
and by avoiding all oppression. Hence, all bureaucratic state central- 
ism and the feudal privileges of individual provinces must first of all 
be rejected. 

Under these conditions, and only under these conditions, will it be 
possible to establish national order in Austria in place of national dis- 
sension, that is, if the following principles are recognized: 

r. Austria must be transformed into a democratic state federation 
of nationalities. 

2. The historical crown territories must be replaced by nationally 
delimited self-governing bodies, in each of which legislation and ad- 
ministration shall be entrusted to national parliaments elected on a 
basis of universal, direct and equal suffrage. 

3. All the self-governing regions of one and the same nation must 
jointly form a single national union, which shall manage its national 
affairs on an absolutely autonomous basis. 

4. The rights of national minorities must be guaranteed by a 
special law passed by the Imperial Parliament. 

The program ends with an appeal for solidarity on the part of 
all the nations of Austria. 26 

It is not difficult to see that this program retains certain traces 
of “territorialism,” but that in general it is a formulation of the 
idea of national autonomy. It is therefore not without cause that 
Springer, the first agitator on behalf of national autonomy, greets 
it with enthusiasm; 27 Bauer also supports this program, calling 
it a “theoretical victory” 28 for national autonomy; only, in the 
interest of greater clarity, he proposes to replace Point 4 by a more 
definite formulation, which would declare the necessity of “con- 

* In M. Panin’s Russian translation, “national individualities” is given in 
place of “national peculiarities.” Panin translated this passage incorrectly. 
The word “individuality” is not contained in the German text, which speaks 
of nationalen Eigenart , peculiarities, which is far from being the same thing. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 33 

stitutmg the national minority within each self-governing region 
into a juridical public corporation 55 for the management of educa- 
tional and other cultural affairs . 29 

Such is the national program of the Austrian Social-Democratic 
Party. 

Let us examine its scientific foundations. 

Let us see how the Austrian Social-Democratic Party justifies 
the national autonomy it advocates. 

Let us turn to the theoreticians of national autonomy, Springer 
and Bauer. 

National autonomy proceeds from the conception of a nation as 
a union of individuals without regard to definite territory. 

According to Springer: “Nationality is not essentially connected 
with territory 55 ; it is “an autonomous union of persons . 55 30 

Bauer also speaks of a nation as a “community of persons 55 which 
“does not enjoy exclusive sovereignty in any particular region . 55 31 

But the persons constituting a nation do not always five in one 
compact mass; they are frequently divided into groups, and in that 
form are interspersed among foreign national organisms. It is 
capitalism which drives them into other regions and cities in 
search of a livelihood. But when they enter foreign national terri- 
tories and there form minorities, these groups are made to suffer by 
the local national majorities in the way of limitations on their lan- 
guage, schools, etc. Hence national collisions. Hence the “unsuita- 
bility 55 of territorial autonomy. The only solution to such a 
situation, according to Springer and Bauer, is to organize the 
minorities of the given nationality dispersed over various parts of 
the state into a single, general, inter-class national union. Such a 
union alone, in their opinion, can protect the cultural interests of 
national minorities, and it alone is capable of putting an end to 
national discord. 

Hence the necessity [says Springer] of organizing the national- 
ities, of investing them with rights and responsibilities. 82 . .. Of 
course, a law is easily drafted, but will it be effective as a law? ... If 
one wants to make a law for nations, one must first create the nations. 



34 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

. . . Unless nationalities are constituted it is impossible to create na- 
tional rights and eliminate national dissension . 33 

Bauer expresses himself in the same spirit when he proposes, as 
“a demand of the working class,” that “the minorities should be 
constituted into juridical public corporations based on the personal 
principle.” 34 

But how is a nation to be organized ? How is one to determine 
to what nation any given individual belongs? 

Nationality [says Springer] will be determined by certificates; 
every individual domiciled in a given region will be obliged to de- 
clare to what nationality of that region he belongs . 35 

The personal principle [says Bauer] presumes that the population 
will be divided into nationalities On the basis of the free declara- 

tion of the adult citizens national cadasters must be drawn up . 36 

Further, Bauer says: “All the Germans in nationally homo- 
geneous districts and all the Germans entered in the national 
cadasters in the dual districts will constitute the German nation 
and elect a National Council.” 37 

The same applies to the Czechs, Poles, and so on. 

The National Council [according to Springer] is the cultural par- 
liament of the nation, empowered to establish the principles and ap- 
prove the methods of, that is, to assume guardianship over, national 
education, national literature, art and science, the formation of 
academies, museums, galleries, theaters, etc . 38 

Such is the organization of a nation and its central institution. 
According to Bauer, the Austrian Social-Democratic Party is 
striving by the creation of these inter-class institutions “to make 
national culture ... the possession of the whole people and 
thereby fuse all the members of the nation into a national cultural 
community !' 39 (Our italics. — J£.) 

One might think that all this concerns Austria alone. But Bauer 
does not agree. He emphatically declares that national autonomy 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 35 

is essential for all states which., like Austria, consist of several 
nationalities. 

According to Bauer: “The working class of all nations in a 
multi-national state puts forward its demand for national auton- 
omy in opposition to the national government policy of the prop- 
ertied classes.” 40 

Then, imperceptibly substituting national autonomy for the 
self-determination of nations, he continues: “Thus, national au- 
tonomy, the self-determination of nations, will necessarily become 
the constitutional program of the proletariat of all nations in a 
multi-national state.” 41 

But he goes still further. He profoundly believes that the inter- 
class “national unions” “constituted” by him and Springer will 
serve as a sort of prototype of the future socialist society. For he 
knows that “the socialist system of society . . . will divide human- 
ity into nationally delimited communities”; 42 that under socialism 
there will take place “a grouping of humanity into autonomous 
national communities”; 43 that “thus, socialist society will un- 
doubtedly present a checkered picture of national unions of 
persons and territorial corporations,” 44 and that accordingly “the 
socialist principle of nationality is a supreme synthesis of the 
national principle and national autonomy.” 45 

Enough, it would seem. 

These are the arguments in favor of national autonomy as 
given in the works of Bauer and Springer. 

The first thing that strikes the eye is the entirely inexplicable 
and absolutely unjustifiable substitution of national autonomy for 
self-determination of nations. One or the other: either Bauer failed 
to understand the meaning of self-determination, or he did under- 
stand it but for some reason or other deliberately narrowed its 
meaning. For there is no doubt (a) that national autonomy 
presupposes the integrity of the multi-national state, whereas self- 
determination transcends this integrity and (b) that self-deter- 
mination endows a nation with sovereign rights, whereas national 



3 6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

autonomy endows it only with “cultural” rights. That, in the first 
place. 

In the second place, a combination of internal and external con- 
ditions is fully possible at some future time by virtue of which one 
or another of the nationalities may decide to secede from a multi- 
national state, say from Austria (did not the Ruthenian Social- 
Democrats at the Brtinn Party Congress announce their readiness 
to unite the “two parts” of their people into one whole? 4 ®). What, 
in such a case, becomes of national autonomy, which is inevitable 
for the proletariat of all nations'? 

What sort of “solution” of the problem is it that mechanically 
squeezes nations into the Procrustes’ bed of an integral state? 

Further. National autonomy is contrary to the whole course of 
development of nations. It calls for the organization of nations; 
but can they be artificially welded if in actual reality, by virtue of 
economic development, whole groups are torn from them and dis- 
persed over various regions? There is no doubt that in the early 
stages of capitalism nations become welded. But there is also no 
doubt that in the higher stages of capitalism a process of dispersion 
of nations sets in, a process whereby whole groups, in search of a 
livelihood, separate from nations, subsequently settling finally in 
other regions of the state; in the course of which these settlers lose 
their old contacts, acquire new contacts in their new domicile, 
from generation to generation acquire new habits and new 
tastes, and possibly a new language. . . . 

One asks: Is it possible to unite into a single national union 
groups that have grown so distinct? Where are the magic hoops 
to unite what cannot be united ? Is it conceivable that, for instance, 
the Germans of the Baltic Provinces and the Germans of Trans- 
caucasia can be “welded into a single nation”? But if it is not 
conceivable and not possible, wherein does national autonomy 
differ from the utopia of the old nationalists, who endeavored to 
turn back the wheel of history ? 

But the cohesion and unity of a nation diminish not only as a 
result of migration. They diminish also from internal causes. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 37 

owing to the growing acuteness of the class struggle. In the early 
stages of capitalism one may still speak of a “cultural community” 
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. But as large-scale 
industry develops and the class struggle becomes more and more 
acute, this community begins to melt away. One cannot seriously 
speak of the “cultural community” of a nation when the masters 
and the workers of a nation have ceased to understand each other. 
What “common fate” can there be when the bourgeoisie thirsts for 
war, and the proletariat declares “war on war” ? Can a single inter- 
class national union be formed from such contradictory elements? 
And, after this, can one speak of the “fusion of all the members of 
the nation into a national cultural community” ? 47 Is it not obvious 
that national autonomy is contrary to the whole course of the 
class struggle? 

But let us assume for a moment that the slogan “organize the 
nation” is practicable. One might understand bourgeois nationalist 
parliamentarians endeavoring to “organize” a nation for the 
purpose of securing additional votes. But since when have Social- 
Democrats begun to occupy themselves with “organizing” nations, 
“constituting” nations, “creating” nations? 

What sort of Social-Democrats are they who in a period of ex- 
treme aggravation of the class struggle organize inter-class na- 
tional unions? Hitherto the Social-Democratic Party of Austria, 
like every other Social-Democratic Party, had one aim — to organ- 
ize the proletariat. This aim has apparently become antiquated. 
Springer and Bauer are now setting a new aim, a more thrilling 
aim, namely, to create, to organize a nation. 

Besides, logic has its obligations : he who adopts national auton- 
omy must also adopt this “new” aim; but to adopt the latter 
means to abandon the class position and to adopt the path of 
nationalism. Springer’s and Bauer’s national autonomy is a subtle 
form of nationalism. 

And it is by no means fortuitous that the national program of 
the Austrian Social-Democrats enjoins a concern for the “preserva- 
tion and development of the national peculiarities of the peo- 



38 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

pies.” Just think: to “preserve” such “national peculiarities” o£ 
the Transcaucasian Tatars as self-flagellation at the festival of 
Sha\hsei-V a\hsei; or to “develop” such “national peculiarities” 
of the Georgians as the vendetta! 

A demand of this character is quite in place in an outright 
bourgeois nationalist program; and if it appears in the program 
of the Austrian Social-Democrats it is because national autonomy 
tolerates rather than precludes such demands. 

But if national autonomy is unsuitable now, it will be still more 
unsuitable in the future society, a socialist society. 

Bauer’s prophecy regarding the division of “humanity into na- 
tionally delimited communities” 48 is refuted by the whole course 
of development of present-day humanity. National partitions are 
being demolished and are falling, rather than becoming firmer. 

As early as the forties Marx declared that “national differences 
and antagonisms between peoples are vanishing gradually from 
day to day” and that “the supremacy of the proletariat will cause 
them to vanish still faster .” 49 The subsequent development of 
mankind, accompanied as it was by the colossal growth of cap- 
italist production, the shuffling of nationalities, and the amalga- 
mation of people within ever larger territories, emphatically 
corroborates Marx’s thought. 

Bauer’s desire to represent socialist society as a “checkered pic- 
ture of national unions of persons and territorial corporations” is 
a timid attempt to replace Marx’s conception of socialism by the 
reformed conception of Bakunin. The history of socialism proves 
that every such attempt harbors the elements of inevitable failure. 

We shall not dwell on the “socialist principle of nationality” 
glorified by Bauer, which, in our opinion, replaces the socialist 
principle of the class struggle by the bourgeois principle of “na- 
tionality.” If national autonomy is based on such a dubious prin- 
ciple, it must be confessed that it can only cause harm to the 
working-class movement. 

True, such nationalism is not so transparent, for it is skillfully 
masked by socialist phrases, but it is all the more harmful to the 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 39 

proletariat for that reason. We can always cope with open nation- 
alism, for it can easily be discerned. It is much more difficult to 
combat a nationalism which is masked and unrecognizable be- 
neath its mask. Protected by the armor of socialism, it is less vul- 
nerable and more tenacious. Implanted among the workers, it 
poisons the atmosphere and spreads noxious ideas of mutual mis- 
trust and aloofness among the workers of the different na- 
tionalities. 

But this does not exhaust the harm caused by national auton- 
omy. It tends not only to create aloofness, but also to break up a 
united working class movement. The idea of national autonomy 
creates the psychological conditions that make for the division of 
a united workers 5 party into separate parties built on national 
lines. The break-up of the party is followed by the break-up of the 
trade unions, and complete isolation is the result. In this way a 
united class movement is broken up into separate national rivulets. 

Austria, the home of “national autonomy,” provides the most 
deplorable examples of this. Since 1897 (the Wimberg Party 
Congress) the one-time united Austrian Social-Democratic Party 
has been breaking up into separate parties. The break-up became 
still more marked after the Briinn Congress (1899); which 
adopted national autonomy. Matters have finally come to such a 
pass that in place of a united inter-national party we now have six 
national parties, of which the Czech Social-Democratic Party will 
even have nothing to do with the German Social-Democratic 
Party. 

But with the parties are associated the trade unions. In Austria, 
both in the parties and in the trade unions, the main brunt of the 
work is borne by the same Social-Democratic workers. There was 
therefore reason to fear that separatism in the party would lead 
to separatism in the trade unions and that the trade unions would 
also break up. That, in fact, has been the case: the trade unions 
have also divided according to nationality. Now things frequently 
go so far that the Czech workers will even break a strike of the 



40 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

German workers, or will unite at the municipal elections with the 
Czech bourgeoisie against the German workers. 

It will be seen from this that national autonomy is no solution 
for the national problem. Nay more, it only serves to aggravate 
and confuse the problem by creating a soil which favors the de- 
struction of the unity of the working-class movement, fosters 
national aloofness among the workers and intensifies friction be- 
tween them. 

Such is the harvest of national autonomy. 

V. THE BUND, ITS NATIONALISM AND ITS 
SEPARATISM 

We said above that Bauer, while he is prepared to grant na- 
tional autonomy to the Czechs, Poles, and so on, is opposed to 
granting similar autonomy to the Jews. In answer to the question 
“Should the working class demand autonomy for the Jewish peo- 
ple ?” Bauer says that “the Jewish workers should not demand 
national autonomy/’ 50 According to Bauer, the reason is that 
“capitalist society makes it impossible for them [the Jews — J.S . ] 
to continue as a nation.” 51 

In brief, the Jewish nation is coming to an end, and therefore 
there is nobody to demand national autonomy for. The Jews are 
being assimilated. 

This view of the fate of the Jews as a nation is not a new one. 
It was expressed by Marx as early as the forties 62 in reference 
chiefly to the German Jews. It was repeated by Kautsky in 1903 53 
in reference to the Russian Jews. It is now being repeated by Bauer 
in reference to the Austrian Jews, with the difference, however, 
that he denies not the present but the future of the Jewish nation. 

Bauer explains the impossibility of preserving the existence of 
the Jews as a nation by the fact that “the Jews have no closed 
territory of settlement.” 54 This explanation, in the main a correct 
one, does not however express the whole truth. The fact of the 
matter is primarily that among the Jews there is no large and 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 41 

stable stratum associated with the soil, which would naturally 
rivet the nation, serving not only as its framework but also as a 
“national” market. Of the five or six million Russian Jews only 
three to four per cent are connected with agriculture in any way. 
The remaining 96 per cent are employed in trade, industry, in 
city institutions, and, in general, live, in cities; moreover, they are 
spread all over Russia and do not constitute a majority in a single 
province. 

Thus, interspersed as national minorities in areas inhabited by 
other nationalities, the Jews as a rule serve “foreign” nations as 
manufacturers and traders, and as members of the free profes- 
sions, naturally adapting themselves to the “foreign nations” in 
respect to language, and so forth. All this, taken together with the 
increasing reshuffling of nationalities characteristic of developed 
forms of capitalism, leads to the assimilation of the Jews. The 
abolition of the Pale would only serve to hasten this process. 

The question of national autonomy for the Russian Jews con- 
sequently assumes a somewhat curious character: autonomy is 
being proposed for a nation whose future is denied and whose 
existence has still to be proved! 

Nevertheless, this was the curious and shaky position adopted 
by the Bund when at its Sixth Congress (1905) it adopted a 
“national program” based on national autonomy. 

Two circumstances impelled the Bund to take this step. 

The first circumstance is the existence of the Bund as an organ- 
ization of Jewish, and only Jewish, Social-Democratic workers. 
Even before 1897 the Social-Democratic groups active among the 
Jewish workers set themselves the task of creating “a special 
Jewish working-class organization.” 55 They founded such an 
organization in 1897 by uniting to form the Bund. This was at a 
time when Russian Social-Democracy as a whole virtually did not 
exist. The Bund steadily grew and spread, and stood out more 
and more vividly against the background of the sunless days of 

Russian Social-Democracy Then came the early years of the 

twentieth century. A mass working-class movement came into 



42 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

being. The Polish Social-Democratic Party grew, drawing the 
Jewish workers into the mass struggle. The Russian Social-Demo- 
cratic Party grew and attracted the “Bund” workers. Lacking a 
territorial basis, the national framework of the Bund began to be 
restrictive. The Bund was faced with the problem of either merg- 
ing with the general inter-national wave, or of defending its 
independent existence as an extra-territorial organization. The 
Bund chose the latter course. 

Thus grew up the theory that the Bund is “the sole representa- 
tive of the Jewish proletariat.” 

But to justify this strange theory in any simple way became 
impossible. A background of “principle,” a justification on “prin- 
ciple,” was needed. National autonomy proved to be this basis. 
The Bund seized upon it, borrowing it from the Austrian Social- 
Democrats. If the Austrians had not had such a program the 
Bund would have invented it in order to provide a justification for 
its independent existence on “principle.” 

Thus, after a first timid attempt in 1901 (the Fourth Congress), 
the Bund finally adopted a “national program” in 1905 (the Sixth 
Congress). 

The second circumstance is the peculiar position of the Jews, 
who form isolated national minorities within integral regions of 
compact majorities of other nationalities. 

We have already said that this position is undermining the 
exis tence of the Jews as a nation and is driving them towards 
assimilation. But this is an objective process. Subjectively, in the 
minds of the Jews, it provokes a reaction and gives rise to the 
demanrl for a guarantee of the rights of a national minority, of a 
guarantee against assimilation. 

Preaching as it does the vitality of the Jewish “nationality,” the 
Bund could not avoid being in favor of a guarantee. And, having 
taken up this position, it could not but accept national autonomy. 
For if the Bund could seize upon any autonomy at all, it could 
only be national autonomy, national cultural autonomy: there 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 43 

could be no question of territorial political autonomy for the 
Jews, since the Jews have no definite and integral territory. 

It is noteworthy that the Bund from the outset stressed the char- 
acter of national autonomy as a guarantee of the rights of national 
minorities, as a guarantee of the “free development” of nations. It 
is not for nothing that the representative of the Bund at the Second 
Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Party, Goldblatt, de- 
fined national autonomy as consisting of “institutions which 
guarantee them [nations — JS.] complete freedom of cultural 
development.” 56 A similar proposal was made by supporters of 
the ideas of the Bund in the Social-Democratic fraction of the 
Fourth Duma. . . . 

In this way the Bund adopted the curious position of national 
autonomy for the Jews. 

We have examined, above, national autonomy in general. The 
examination showed that national autonomy leads to nationalism. 
We shall see later that the Bund has come to a similar end. But 
the Bund also regards national autonomy from a specific angle, 
as a guarantee of the rights of national minorities. Let us examine 
the question from this specific angle also. This is all the more 
necessary since the problem of national minorities — and not of the 
Jewish minorities alone — is one of serious moment for the Social- 
Democratic Party. 

And so, it is a question of “institutions which guarantee” the 
nations “complete freedom of cultural development.” (Our italics 

-m 

But what are these “institutions which guarantee,” etc.? 

They are primarily the “National Council” of Springer and 
Bauer^ something in the nature of a Diet for cultural matters. 

But can these institutions guarantee the nations “complete free, 
dom of cultural development”? Can a Diet on cultural matters 
guarantee a nation against nationalist repressions? 

The Bund believes it can. But history proves the contrary. 

At one time a Diet existed in Russian Poland. It was a political 
Diet and, of course, endeavored to guarantee freedom of “cultural 



44 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

development” for the Poles. But, far from succeeding in doing 
so, it itself succumbed in the unequal struggle against the political 
conditions generally prevailing in Russia. 

A Diet has been in existence for a long time in Finland, and it 
also endeavors to protect the Finnish nation from “attempts,” but 
how far it succeeds in doing so everybody knows. 

Of course, there are Diets and Diets, and it is not so easy to 
cope with the democratically organized Finnish Diet as it was 
with the aristocratic Polish Diet. But the decisive factor, never- 
theless, is not the Diet but the general regime in Russia. If such a 
gross and Asiatic social and political regime existed in Russia 
now as in the past, at the time the Polish Diet was abolished, the 
Finnish Diet would be much worse off. Moreover, the policy of 
“attempts” upon Finland is growing, and it cannot be said that 
it has met with defeat 

If this is the case with old, historically evolved institutions— 
political Diets— still less will young Diets, young institutions, 
especially such feeble institutions as cultural Diets, be able to 
guarantee the free development of nations. 

Obviously, the point lies not in institutions, but in the general 
regime prevailing in the country. If there is no democracy in the 
country there can be no guarantee of “the complete freedom of 
cultural development” of nationalities. One may say with cer- 
tainty that the more democratic a country is the fewer are the 
attempts made on the “freedom of nationalities,” and the greater 
are the guarantees against such attempts. 

Russia is a semi-Asiatic country, and therefore in Russia the 
policy of attempts not infrequently assumes the grossest form, the 
form of pogroms. It need hardly be said that in Russia guarantees 
have been reduced to the very minimum. 

Germany is already Europe, and she has a greater or lesser 
degree of political freedom. It is not surprising that in Germany 
the policy of attempts never takes the form of pogroms. 

In France, of course, the guarantees are still greater, for France 
is more democratic than Germany. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 45 

We will not mention Switzerland, where, thanks to her highly- 
developed, although bourgeois, democracy, nationalities live in 
freedom, whether they represent minorities or majorities. 

Thus the Bund adopts a false position when it asserts that “in- 
stitutions” by themselves are able to guarantee the complete 
cultural development of nationalities. 

It may be said that the Bund itself regards the establishment 
of democracy in Russia as a preliminary condition for the “crea- 
tion of institutions” and guarantees of freedom. But this is not 
the case. From the report of the Eighth Conference of the Bund 
it will be seen that the Bund thinks it can secure “institutions” 
under the present system in Russia by “reforming” the Jewish 
community. 

The community [one of the leaders of the Bund said at this con- 
ference] may become the nucleus of future national cultural au- 
tonomy. National cultural autonomy is a form of self-service on the 
part of nations, a form of satisfying national needs. The community 
form contains a similar content. They are links in the same chain, 
stages in the same evolution . 57 

On this basis, the conference decided that it was necessary to 
strive “for the reform of the Jewish community and its conversion 
by legislative means into a lay institution,” 58 democratically or- 
ganized. (Our italics. — J.S . ) 

It is evident that the Bund considers that the condition and 
guarantee He not in the democratization of Russia, but in some 
future “lay institution” of the Jews, obtained by “reforming the 
Jewish community,” so to speak, by “legislative” means, through 
the Duma. 

But we have already seen that “institutions” in themselves can- 
not serve as “guarantees” if the regime in the state generally is not 
a democratic one. 

But what, it may be asked, will be the position under a future 
democratic system? Will not specific “cultural institutions which 
guarantee, etc.,” be required even under democracy ? What is the 



4 6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

position in this respect in democratic Switzerland, for example? 
Are there specific cultural institutions in Switzerland on the pat- 
tern of Springer’s “National Council’ 5 ? No, there are not. But do 
not the cultural interests of, for instance, the Italians, who con- 
stitute a minority, suffer for that reason? One does not seem to 
hear that they do. And that is quite natural: in Switzerland all 
specifically cultural “institutions,” which supposedly “guarantee,” 
etc., are rendered superfluous by democracy. 

And so, impotent in the present and superfluous in the future — 
such are the institutions of national cultural autonomy, and such 
is national autonomy. 

But it becomes still more pernicious when it is foisted upon a 
“nation” whose present and future are open to doubt. In such 
cases the advocates of national autonomy are obliged to retain and 
preserve all the attributes of a “nation,” not only the useful at- 
tributes but also the harmful ones, just for the sake of “saving the 
nation” from assimilation, just for the sake of “preserving” it. 

That the Bund should adopt this dangerous path was inevitable. 
And it did adopt it. We are referring to the resolutions of recent 
conferences of the Bund on the question of the “Sabbath,” “Yid- 
dish,” etc. 

Social-Democrats strive to secure the right of all nations to the 
use of their own language. But that does not satisfy the Bund: it 
demands that “the right of the Jewish language” (Our italics — 
JS.) be fought for with “particular insistence.” 59 And the Bund 
itself, in the elections to the Fourth Duma, declared that it would 
give “preference to those of them [candidates to the electoral 
curiae # ] who undertake to defend the rights of the Jewish 
laijguage.” 60 

Not the general right of all nations to use their own language, 
but the particular right of the Jewish language, Yiddish! Let the 
workers of the various nationalities fight primarily for their own 
language: the Jews for Jewish, the Georgians for Georgian, and 
so forth. The struggle for the general right of all nations is a 

* Curia — electoral college to the Duma. — Ed. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 47 

secondary matter. You need not, if you do not wish, recognize the 
right of all oppressed nationalities to use their native languages; 
but if you have recognized the right of Yiddish, know that the 
Bund will vote for you, the Bund will “prefer” you. 

But in what way then does the Bund differ from the bourgeois 
nationalists ? 

Social-Democrats are striving to secure the establishment of one 
compulsory weekly rest day. But that does not satisfy the Bund: it 
demands that “by legislative means . . . the Jewish proletariat 
should be granted the right of observing the Sabbath and be 
relieved of the obligation of observing another day.” 61 

It is to be expected that the Bund will take another “forward 
step” and demand the right to observe all the ancient Hebrew 
holidays. And if, to the misfortune of the Bund, the Jewish work- 
ers have discarded religious prejudices and do not want to observe 
them, the Bund with its agitation in favor of “the right of the 
Sabbath” will remind them of the Sabbath and will inculcate in 
them, so to speak, “the Sabbath-day spirit.” 

Quite comprehensible, therefore, are the “fiery speeches” of the 
speakers at the Eighth Conference of the Bund who demanded 
“Jewish hospitals,” a demand which was based on the argument 
that “a patient feels more at home among his own people,” that 
“the Jewish worker will not feel at ease among Polish workers and 
will feel at ease among Jewish shopkeepers.” 62 

The maintenance of everything Jewish, the preservation of all 
the national peculiarities of the Jews, even those that are patently 
noxious to the proletariat, the isolation of the Jews from every- 
thing non-Jewish, even the establishment of special hospitals — 
that is the level to which the Bund has sunk! 

, Comrade Plekhanov was right a thousand times over when he 
said that the Bund “is adapting socialism to nationalism.” * Of 
course, V. Kossovsky and Bundists like him may accuse Plek- 

* This phrase was applied to Bund and Caucasian Social-Democrats by 
Plekhanov in an article printed in Za Partiyu ( For the Party) on October 2, 
1912. — Ed. 



48 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

hanov of being a “demagogue” — paper will put up with anything 
that is written on it — but those who know the activities of the 
Bund will easily realize that these doughty fellows are simply 
afraid to tell the truth of themselves and are hiding behind scur- 
rilous accusations of “demagogy ” 

But since it holds such ,a position on the national question, the 
Bund was naturally obliged to demand the isolation of the Jewish 
workers also in the matter of organization, to demand national 
curiae within the Social-Democratic Party. Such is the logic of 
national autonomy! 

And, in fact, the Bund passed from the theory of “sole repre- 
sentation” to the theory of “national demarcation” of workers. 
The Bund demands that the Russian Social-Democratic Party 
should “in its organizational structure introduce demarcation ac- 
cording to nationalities.” 63 From “demarcation” it made a “step 
forward” to the theory of “isolation.” It is not without good cause 
that speeches were made at the Eighth Conference of the Bund 
declaring that “national existence lies in isolation.” 64 

Organizational federalism harbors the elements of disintegra- 
tion and separatism. The Bund is heading for separatism. 

And, indeed, there is nothing else it can head for. Its very ex- 
istence as an extra-territorial organization drives it to separatism. 
The Bund does not possess a definite integral territory; it operates 
on “foreign” territories, whereas the neighboring Polish, Lettish, 
and Russian Social-Democratic parties are inter-national, terri- 
torial collective bodies. But the result is that every extension of 
these collective bodies means a “loss” for the Bund and a restric- 
tion of its field of action. There are two alternatives: either the 
entire Russian Social-Democratic Party must be reconstructed on 
the principle of national federalism— which will enable the Bund 
to “secure” the Jewish proletariat for itself; or the inter-national 
territorial principle of these collective bodies remains in force — in 
which case the Bund must be reconstructed along inter-national 
lines, as is the case with the Polish and Lettish Social-Democratic 
parties. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 49 

This explains why the Bond has always demanded that “the 
Russian Social-Democratic Party be reformed along federal 
lines” 65 

In 1906, bending before the wave of feeling in favor of unity 
among the rank and file, the Bund chose a middle path and joined 
the Russian Social-Democratic Party. But how did it join? 
Whereas the Polish and Lettish Social-Democratic parties joined 
for the purpose of peaceable joint action, the Bund joined with 
the purpose of waging war for a federation. That is exactly what 
the leader of the Bundists, Medem, said at the time: 

We are joining not for the sake of an idyll, but in order to fight. 
There are no idylls, and only Manilovs * can hope for them in the 
near future. The Bund must join the party armed cap-a-pie . 66 

It would be wrong to regard this as an expression of evil intent 
on Modem’s part. It is not a matter of evil intent, but of the 
peculiar position of the Bund, which compels it to fight the Rus- 
sian Social-Democratic Party as a party built on inter-national 
lines. And in fighting it the Bund naturally violated the interests 
of unity. Finally, matters reached such a pitch that the Bund 
formally broke with the Russian Social-Democratic Party by vio- 
lating the statutes, and in the elections to the Fourth Duma joined 
forces with the Polish nationalists against the Polish Social- 
Democrats. 

The Bund apparently considered that a break would provide 
the most favorable conditions for its activities. And so the “princi- 
ple” of organizational “demarcation” led to separatism and to 
complete rupture. 

In the controversy with the old Is^ra f on the question of 
federalism, the Bund once wrote: 

* Manilov — a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls represented as a sentimental 
dreamer. — Ed. 

+ See History of the Communist Tarty of the Soviet Union, New York, 
1939, pp. 22-30.—. Ed. 



50 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

The ls\ra wants to assure us that federal relations between the 
Bund and the Russian Social-Democratic Party are bound to weaken 
the ties between them. We cannot refute this opinion by referring 
to practice in Russia, for the simple reason that the Russian Social- 
Democratic Party does not exist as a federal body. But we can refer 
to the extremely edifying experience of the Social-Democratic Party 
of Austria, which assumed a federal character by virtue of the de- 
cision of the Party Congress of 1897. 67 

This was written in 1902. 

But we are now in the year 1913. We now have both Russian 
“practice” and the “experience of the Social-Democratic Party of 
Austria.” 

What do they tell us? 

Let us begin with “the extremely edifying experience of the 
Social-Democratic Party of Austria.” Up to 1896 there was a 
united Social-Democratic Party in Austria. In that year the 
Czechs, at the International Congress in London, first demanded 
separate representation, and got it. In 1897, at the Vienna (Wim- 
berg) Party Congress, the united party was formally liquidated 
and in its place a federal league of six national “Social-Democratic 
groups” was set up. Subsequently these groups were converted 
into independent parties. The parties gradually severed contact. 
The parties were followed by the parliamentary fraction, which 
also broke up — national “clubs” were formed. Next came the 
trade unions, which also split along national lines. Even the co- 
operatives were affected, the Czech separatists calling upon the 
workers to split them up. # We will not dwell on the fact that 
separatist agitation is undermining the sense of solidarity of the 
workers and frequently drives them to strike-breaking. 

Thus “the extremely edifying experience of the Social-Demo- 
cratic Party of Austria” speaks against the Bund and for the old 
ls\ra. Federalism in the Austrian party has led to the most 

* Quoted from a brochure by Karl Vanek, a Czech Social-Democratic 
member of the Austrian parliament, and one of the leaders of the Czech 
separatists, in Do\umente des Separatisms, p. 29. — Ed. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 5 1 

monstrous form of separatism and to the destruction of the unity 
of the working-class movement. 

We have seen above that “practice in Russia” also bears this 
out. Like the Czech separatists, the Bundist separatists have 
broken with the general Russian Social-Democratic Party. As to 
the trade unions, the Bundist trade unions, they were always 
organized on national lines, that is to say, they were always cut 
off from the workers of other nationalities. 

Complete isolation and complete rupture — that is what is re- 
vealed by the “Russian experience” of federalism. 

It is not surprising that the effect of such a state of affairs upon 
the workers is to weaken their feeling of solidarity and to de- 
moralize them, and the latter process is also penetrating the Bund. 
We are referring to the increasing collisions between the Jewish 
and the Polish workers in connection with unemployment. This 
is the kind of speech that was uttered on this subject at the Ninth 
Conference of the Bund: 

...We regard the Polish workers, who are squeezing us out, as 
pogromists, as scabs, we do not support their strikes, we break them. 
Secondly, we reply to being squeezed by squeezing in our turn: 
we reply to Jewish workers not being allowed into the factories by 
not allowing Polish workers near the benches . .. .If we do not ta\e 
this matter into our own hands the workers will follow others . 68 
(Our italics — J.S.) 

That is the way they talk about solidarity at a Bund conference. 

You cannot go further than this in the way of demarcation and 
isolation. The Bund has achieved its aim: it is carrying its demar- 
cation of the workers of different nationalities to the point of 
conflicts and strike-breaking. And there is no other course: “If we 
do not take this matter into our own hands the workers will follow 
others. . . .” 

The disorganization of the working-class movement, the de- 
moralization of the ranks of Social-Democracy — that is whither 
the federalism of the Bund is leading. 



52 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Thus, the idea of national autonomy, the atmosphere it creates, 
has proved to be even more pernicious in Russia than in Austria. 

VI. THE CAUCASIANS AND THE CONFERENCE OF 
LIQUIDATORS 

We spoke above of the waverings of one section of the Cau- 
casian Social-Democrats who were unable to withstand the na- 
tionalist epidemic. These waverings were revealed in the fact 
that, strange as it may seem, the Social-Democrats mentioned 
followed in the footsteps of the Bund and declared in favor of 
national cultural autonomy. 

Regional autonomy for the Caucasus as a whole and national 
cultural autonomy for the nations forming the Caucasus that is 
the way these Social-Democrats, who, incidentally, are linked 
with the Russian Liquidators, formulate their demand. 

Listen to their acknowledged leader, the not unknown N. 

Everybody knows that the Caucasus differs profoundly from the 
central gubernias , both as regards the racial composition of its popu- 
lation and as regards its territory and agricultural development. The 
exploitation and material development of such a region require local 
workers acquainted with local peculiarities and accustomed to the 
local climate and culture. All laws designed to further the exploita- 
tion of the local territory should be issued locally and should be put 
into effect by local forces. Consequently, the competence of the 
central organ of Caucasian self-government should extend to legisla- 
tion on local questions. . . . Hence, the functions of the Caucasian 
center should consist in the legislation of laws designed to further the 
economic exploitation of the local territory and the material prosper- 
ity of the region . 69 

In a word, regional autonomy for the Caucasus. 

If we abstract ourselves from the rather confused and incoherent 
arguments of N., it must be admitted that his conclusion is correct. 
Regional autonomy for the Caucasus, within the framework of a 
general state constitution, which N. does not deny, is indeed essen- 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 53 

tial because of the peculiarity of its composition and its social 
conditions. This was also acknowledged by the Russian Social- 
Democratic Party when, at its Second Congress, it proclaimed 
“regional self-government for regions which in respect of their 
social conditions and the composition of their population differ 
from the specifically Russian regions . 55 

When Martov submitted this point for discussion at the Second 
Congress, he justified it on the grounds that “the vast extent of 
Russia and the experience of our centralized administration point 
to the necessity and expediency of regional self-government for 
such large units as Finland, Poland, Lithuania and the Caucasus . 55 

But from this it follows that regional self-government is to be 
interpreted as regional autonomy. 

But N. goes still further. According to him, regional autonomy 
for the Caucasus covers “only one aspect of the question . 55 

So far we have spoken only of the material development of local 
life. But the economic development of a region is facilitated not only 
by economic activities but also by spiritual, cultural activities. ... A 

culturally strong nation is strong also in the economic sphere But 

the cultural development of nations is possible only in the national 
languages. . . . Consequently, all questions connected with the native 
language are questions of national culture. Such are the questions of 
education, legal procedure, the church, literature, art, science, the 
theater, etc. If the material development of a region unites nations, 
national culture disunites them and places each in a separate sphere. 
Activities of the former kind are associated with a definite territory. 

. . . This is not the case with matters of national culture. They are 
associated not with a definite territory but with the existence of a 
definite nation. The fate of the Georgian language interests a 
Georgian, no matter where he lives. It would be a sign of profound 
ignorance to say that Georgian culture concerns only the Georgians 
who live in Georgia. Take, for instance, the Armenian church. Ar- 
menians of various localities and states take part in the administra- 
tion of its affairs. Territory plays no part here. Or, for instance, the 
creation of a Georgian museum interests not only the Georgians of 



54 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Tiflis, but also the Georgians of Baku, Kutais, St. Petersburg, etc. 

Hence, the administration and control of all affairs of national culture 

must be left to the nations concerned. We are in favor of national 

cultural autonomy for the Caucasian nationalities . 70 

In a word, since culture is not territory, and territory not cul- 
ture, national cultural autonomy is required. That is all N. can say 
in the latter’s favor. 

We shall not stop again to discuss national cultural autonomy 
in general; we have already spoken of its objectionable character. 
We should only like to point out that, while being unsuitable in 
general, national cultural autonomy is meaningless and nonsensical 
in relation to Caucasian conditions. 

And for the following reason. 

National cultural autonomy presumes more or less developed 
nationalities, with a developed culture and literature. Failing these 
conditions, autonomy loses all sense and reduces itself to an ab- 
surdity. But in the Caucasus there are a number of peoples each 
possessing a primitive culture, a specific language, but without its 
own literature; peoples, moreover, which are in a state of transition, 
partly becoming assimilated and partly continuing to develop. 
How is national cultural autonomy to be applied to them ? What is 
to be done with such peoples ? How are they to be “organized” into 
separate national cultural unions, such as are undoubtedly im- 
plied by national cultural autonomy ? 

What is to be done with the Mingrelians, the Abkhazians, the 
Adjarians, the Svanetians, the Lesghians, and so on, who speak 
different languages but do not possess a literature of their own? 
To what nations are they to be attached? Can they be “organized” 
into national unions ? Around what “cultural affairs” are they to 
be “organized”? 

What is to be done with the Ossets, of whom the Transcaucasian 
Ossets are becoming assimilated (but are as yet by no means wholly 
assimilated) by the Georgians and the Ciscaucasian Ossets are 
partly being assimilated by the Russians and partly continuing to 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 55 

develop and are creating their own literature? How are they to 
be “organized” into a single national union? 

To what national union should one attach the Adjarians, who 
speak the Georgian language but whose culture is Turkish and 
who profess the religion of Islam? Shall they be “organized” 
separately from the Georgians tirith regard to religious affairs and 
together with the Georgians with regard to other cultural affairs? 
And what about the Kobuleti, the Ingushes, the Inghilois? 

What kind of autonomy is an autonomy that excludes a whole 
number of peoples from the list ? 

No, this is not a solution of the national problem, but the fruit 
of an idle fancy. 

But let us grant the impossible and assume that our N.’s national 
cultural autonomy has been put into effect. Whither would it lead; 
what would be its results? Take, for instance, the Transcaucasian 
Tatars, with their minimum of literacy, their schools controlled 
by the omnipotent mullahs and their culture permeated by the 

religious spirit It is not difficult to understand that to organize 

them into a national cultural union would be to place them under 
the control of the mullahs, to deliver them to the mercies of the 
reactionary mullahs, to create a new stronghold of spiritual en- 
slavement of the Tatar masses to their worst enemy. 

But since when have Social-Democrats made it a practice to 
bring grist to the mill of the reactionaries ? 

Could the Caucasian Liquidators find nothing better to “pro- 
claim” than the confinement of the Transcaucasian Tatars within 
a national cultural union which would enslave the masses to vicious 
reactionaries ? 

No, this is no solution of the national problem. 

The national problem in the Caucasus can be solved only by 
drawing the backward nations and peoples into the common 
stream of a higher culture. It is the only progressive solution and 
the only solution acceptable to Social-Democrats. Regional au- 
tonomy in the Caucasus is acceptable because it draws the back- 
ward nations into the common cultural development; it helps them 



56 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

to cast off the shell of isolation peculiar to small nationalities; it 
impels them forward and facilitates access to the benefits of a 
higher culture; whereas national cultural autonomy acts in a 
diametrically opposite direction, because it shuts up the nations 
within their old shells, chains them to the lower rungs of cultural 
development and prevents them from rising to the higher rungs of 
culture. 

In this way national autonomy counteracts the beneficial as- 
pects of regional autonomy and nullifies it. 

That is why the mixed type of autonomy which combines 
national cultural autonomy and regional autonomy as proposed by 
N. is also unsuitable. This unnatural combination does not im- 
prove matters but makes them worse, because in addition to re- 
tarding the development of the backward nations it transforms 
regional autonomy into a cause of conflict between the nations 
organized in the national unions. Thus national cultural auton- 
omy, which is unsuitable generally, would be a senseless reactionary 
escapade in the Caucasus. 

So much for the national cultural autonomy of N. and his 
colleagues in the Caucasus. 

Whether the Caucasian Liquidators will take “a step forward” 
and follow in the footsteps of the Bund on the question of organiza- 
tion also, the future alone will show. So far, in the history of 
Social-Democracy, federalism in organization always preceded 
national autonomy in program. The Austrian Social-Democrats 
introduced organizational federalism in 1897, and it was only two 
years later (in 1899) that they adopted national autonomy. The 
Bundists spoke coherently of national autonomy for the first time 
in 1901, whereas organizational federalism had been practiced by 
them since 1897. 

The Caucasian Liquidators have begun from the other end, from 
national autonomy. If they continue to follow in the footsteps of 
the Bund they will first have to demolish the existing organiza- 
tional edifice, which was erected at the end of the nineties on. the 
principles of internationalism. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 57 

But, easy though it may be to adopt national autonomy, which 
is as yet not understood by the workers, it will be difficult to 
demolish an edifice which it has taken many years to build and 
which has been raised and cherished by the workers of all the 
nationalities of the Caucasus. This Herostratian undertaking has 
only to be begun and the eyes of the workers will be opened to the 
nationalist character of national cultural autonomy. 

While the Caucasians are settling the national question in the 
usual manner, by means of verbal and written discussion, the All- 
Russian Conference of the Liquidators has invented a most unusual 
method. It is a simple and easy method. Listen to this: 

Having heard the statement of the Caucasian delegation ... as to 
the necessity of demanding national cultural autonomy, the confer- 
ence, without expressing an opinion as to the substance of the de- 
mand, declares that such an interpretation of the clause in the pro- 
gram which recognizes the right of every nationality to self-deter- 
mination is not contrary to the precise meaning of the latter. 

Thus, first they “do not express an opinion as to the substance” 

of the question, and then they “declare.” An original method 

And what does this original conference “declare”? 

That the “demand” for national cultural autonomy “is not con- 
trary to the precise meaning” of the program, which recognizes the 
right of nations to self-determination. 

Let us examine this proposition. 

The clause on self-determination refers to the rights of nations. 
According to this clause, nations shall have the right not only of 
autonomy but also of secession. It is a question of political self- 
determination. Whom did the Liquidators want to fool when they 
endeavored to misinterpret this right of nations to political self- 
determination, which has long been recognized by the whole in- 
ternational Social-Democratic movement? 

Or perhaps the Liquidators will try to wriggle out of the situa- 
tion and to defend themselves by the sophistry that national cul- 
tural autonomy “is not contrary” to the rights of nations ? That is 
to say that if all the nations in a given state agree to arrange their 



58 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

affairs on the basis of national cultural autonomy, they, the given 
sum of nations, are fully entitled to do so and nobody may forcibly 
impose a different form of political life on them. This is both new 
and brilliant. Should it not be added that, speaking generally, a 
nation has the right to abolish its own constitution, replace it by a 
system of arbitrary rule and revert to the old order on the grounds 
that the nation, and the nation alone, has the right to determine 
its own fate? We repeat: in this sense, neither national cultural 
autonomy nor any other kind of nationalist reaction “is contrary 
to the rights of nations . 

Is this what the esteemed conference wanted to say ? 

No, not this. It specifically says that national cultural autonomy 
“is not contrary,” not to the rights of nations, but “to the precise 
meaning” of the program. The point here is the program and not 
the rights of nations. 

And that is quite understandable. If it were a nation that ad- 
dressed itself to the conference of Liquidators, the conference 
might have directly declared that the nation has a right to national 
cultural autonomy. But it was not a nation that addressed itself 
to the conference, but a “delegation” of Caucasian Social-Democrats 
— bad Social-Democrats, it is true, but Social-Democrats never- 
theless. And they inquired not about the rights of nations, but 
whether national cultural autonomy contradicts the principles of 
Social-Democracy, whether it was not “contrary” to “the precise 
meanin g” of the program of the Social-Democratic Party? 

The rights of nations and “the precise meaning” of the program 
of the Social-Democratic Party are not one and the same thing. 

Evidently, there are demands which, while they are not con- 
trary to the rights of nations, may yet be contrary to “the precise 
meaning” of the program. 

For example. The program of the Social-Democrats contains a 
clause on freedom of religion. According to this clause any group 
of persons have the right to profess any religion they please : Cathol- 
icism, the religion of the Orthodox Church, and so forth. The 
Social-Democrats will combat all forms of religious oppression, be 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 59 

it persecution of members of the Orthodox Church, Catholics, or 
Protestants. Does this mean that Catholicism, Protestantism, etc., 
“are not contrary to the precise meaning” of the program? No, it 
does not. Social-Democrats will always protest against persecution 
of Catholics and Protestants, they will always defend the right of 
nations to profess any religion they please; but at the same time, 
on the basis of a correct understanding of the interests of the pro- 
letariat, they will carry on agitation against Catholicism, Protes- 
tantism and the religion of the Orthodox Church In order to secure 
the triumph of the socialist world conception. 

And they will do so just because there is no doubt that Protestant- 
ism, Catholicism, the religion of the Orthodox Church, etc., are 
“contrary to the precise meaning” of the program, to the cor- 
rectly understood interests of the proletariat. 

The same must be said of self-determination. Nations have the 
right to arrange their affairs as they please; they have the right 
to preserve any of their national institutions, whether beneficial or 
pernicious — nobody can (nobody has the right to!) forcibly inter- 
fere in the life of a nation. But that does not mean that Social- 
Democrats will not combat and agitate against the pernicious in- 
stitutions of nations and against the inexpedient demands of na- 
tions. On the contrary, it is the duty of Social-Democrats to conduct 
such agitation and to endeavor to influence the will of nations so 
that the nations may arrange their affairs in the way that will 
best suit the interests of the proletariat. For this reason Social- 
Democrats, while fighting for the right of nations to self- 
determination, will at the same time agitate, for instance, against 
the secession of the Tatars, or against national cultural autonomy 
for the Caucasian nations; for both, while not contrary to the rights 
of these nations, are contrary “to the precise meaning” of the 
program, to the interests of the Caucasian proletariat. 

Evidently, “the rights of nations” and the “precise meaning” of 
the program are in two entirely different planes. Whereas the 
“precise meaning” of the program expresses the interests of the 
proletariat, as scientifically formulated in the program of the latter, 



60 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

the rights of nations may express the interests of any class bour- 
geoisie, aristocracy, clergy, etc. — depending on the strength and 
influence of these classes. The former sets forth the duties of 
Marxists, the latter the rights of nations, which are made up of 
various classes. The rights of nations and the principles of Social- 
Democracy may or may not be “contrary” to each other, just as, 
say, the pyramid of Cheops may or may not be contrary to the 
famous conference of the Liquidators. They are simply incommen- 
surable. 

But from this it follows that the esteemed conference unpardon- 
ably muddled two entirely different things. The result obtained 
was not a solution of the national problem but an absurdity, ac- 
cording to which the rights of nations and the principles of Social- 
Democracy “are not contrary” to each other, and, consequently, 
every demand of a nation may be made compatible with the in- 
terests of the proletariat; consequently, no demand of a nation 
which is striving for self-determination will be “contrary to the 
precise meaning” of the program! 

Logic is shown no mercy. . . . 

It was this absurdity that gave rise to the now famous resolution 
of the conference of the Liquidators which declares that the de- 
mand for national cultural autonomy “is not contrary to the precise 
meaning” of the program. 

But not only the laws of logic were violated by the conference of 
the Liquidators. 

By sanctioning national cultural autonomy it also violated its 
duty to Russian Social-Democracy. It most definitely violated “the 
precise meaning” of the program, for it is well known that the 
Second Congress, which adopted the program, definitely repudi- 
ated national cultural autonomy. This is what was said at the 
congress in this connection: 

Goldblatt (Bundist): ... I deem it necessary that special institu- 
tions be set up to protect the freedom of cultural development of na- 
tionalities, and I therefore propose that the following words be 
added to Par. 8: “and the creation of institutions which will guar- 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 6 1 

antee them complete freedom of cultural development.” [This, as 
we know, is the Bund’s definition of national cultural autonomy. — 

J^l 

Martynov pointed out that general institutions must be so consti- 
tuted as to protect particular interests also. It is impossible to create a 
special institution to guarantee the freedom of cultural development 
of the nationalities. 

Yegorov: On the question of nationality we can adopt only nega- 
tive proposals: we are opposed to any limitations being imposed upon 
nationality. But we, as Social-Democrats, are not concerned with 
whether any particular nationality will develop as such. That is a 
spontaneous process. 

Koltsov: The delegates from the Bund are always offended when 
their nationalism is referred to. Yet the amendment proposed by the 
delegate from the Bund is a purely nationalist one in character. We 
are asked to take definitely offensive measures in order to support 
even nationalities that are dying out. 

Goldblatt’s amendment was rejected by the majority, only three 
votes being given in support. 

Thus it is clear that the conference of the Liquidators went “con- 
trary to the precise meaning” of the program. It violated the 
program. 

The Liquidators are now trying to justify themselves by re- 
ferring to the Stockholm Congress, which they allege sanctioned 
national cultural autonomy. Thus, V. Kossovsky writes as follows: 

As we know, according to the agreement adopted by the Stock- 
holm Congress, the Bund was allowed to preserve its national pro- 
gram (pending a decision on the national question by a general 
party congress). This congress recorded that national cultural au- 
tonomy at any rate does not contradict the general party program . 71 

But the efforts of the Liquidators are vain. The Stockholm Con- 
gress never thought of sanctioning the program of the Bund — 
it merely agreed to leave the question open for the time being. The 
brave Kossovsky did not have enough courage to tell the whole 
truth. But the facts speak for themselves. Here they are. 



62 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

An amendment was moved by Galin: “That the question of the 
national program be left open in view of the fact that it is not being 
examined by the congress” [For — 5 against 3 2 *] 

Voice: What does that mean — to be left open? 

Chairman : When we say that the national question is left open, 
it means that the Bund may retain its decision on this question until 
the next congress . 72 (Our italics — J.S.) 

As you see, the congress even did “not examine” the question of 
the national program of the Bund — it simply left it “open,” leaving 
the Bund itself to decide the fate of its program until the next 
general congress met. In other words, the Stockholm Congress 
avoided the question, expressing no opinion on national cultural 
autonomy one way or another. 

The conference of the Liquidators, however, most definitely un- 
dertakes to give an opinion on the matter, declares national cultural 
autonomy to be acceptable and endorses it in the name of the 
party program. 

The difference is only too evident. 

Thus, in spite of all its artifices, the conference of the Liquidators 
did not advance the national question a single step. All it could 
do was to squirm before the Bund and the Caucasian national- 
liquidators. 

VII. THE NATIONAL PROBLEM IN RUSSIA 

It remains for us to give a positive solution of the national 
problem. 

We start from the assumption that the problem can be solved 
only in intimate connection with the present situation in Russia. 

Russia is in a transitional period, when “normal ” “constitu- 
tional” life has not yet been established and when the political crisis 
has not yet been settled. Days of storm and “complications” are 
ahead. And this gives rise to the movement, the present and the 
future movement, the aim of which is to achieve complete democ- 
racy. And it is in connection with this movement that the national 
problem must be examined. 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 63 

Thus complete democracy in the country is the basis and con- 
dition for the solution of the national problem. 

When seeking a solution of the problem we must take account 
not only of the situation at home but also of the situation abroad. 
Russia is situated between Europe and Asia, between Austria and 
China. The growth of democracy in Asia is inevitable. 

The growth of imperialism in Europe is not fortuitous. In 
Europe, capital finds itself too restricted, and it is striving towards 
foreign countries in search of new markets, cheap labor, and new 
fields of investment. But this leads to external complications and 
to war. Nobody will dare to say that the Balkan War # is the end 
and not the beginning of the complications. It is quite possible that 
a combination of internal and external factors may arise in which 
one or another nationality in Russia may find it necessary to raise 
and settle the question of its independence. And, of course, it is not 
for Marxists to create obstacles in such cases. 

But it follows from this that Russian Marxists cannot do without 
the right of nations to self-determination. 

Thus the right of self-determination is an essential element in 
the solution of the national problem. 

Further. What must be our attitude towards nations which for 
one reason or another will prefer to remain within the general 
framework? 

We have seen that national cultural autonomy is unsuitable. 

Firstly, it is artificial and impracticable, for it proposes artificially 
to draw into a single nation people whom the very march of 
events, of real events, is disuniting and dispersing to every corner 
of the country. 

Secondly, it stimulates nationalism, because it tends to the view 
which advocates the demarcation of people according to national 
curiae, the organization of nations, the preservation and cultivation 
of “national peculiarities” — a thing that is entirely incompatible 
with Social-Democracy. 

* The war of Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece, and Montenegro against Turkey 
in 1912. — Ed. 



64 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

It is not fortuitous that the Moravian separatists in the Reichsrat, 
having* severed themselves from the German Social-Democratic 
deputies, united with the Moravian bourgeois deputies to form a 
single, so to speak, Moravian "ring.” Nor is it fortuitous that the 
Russian separatists of the Bund have got themselves involved in 
nationalism by acclaiming the “Sabbath” and “Yiddish.” There are 
no Bundist deputies yet in the Duma, but in the Bund district there 
is a clerical-reactionary Jewish community, in the “controlling 
institutions” of which the Bund is arranging a “get-together” of 
the Jewish workers and the bourgeois . 73 Such is the logic of national 
cultural autonomy. 

Thus, national autonomy does not solve the problem. 

What is the way out ? 

The only real solution is regional autonomy, autonomy for such 
crystallized units as Poland, Lithuania, the Ukraine, the Caucasus, 
and so forth. 

The advantage of regional autonomy consists first in the fact 
that it does not deal with a fiction deprived of territory, but with a 
definite population inhabiting a definite territory. 

Secondly, it does not divide people according to nation, it does 
not strengthen national partitions; on the contrary, it only serves 
to break down these partitions and unites the population in such a 
manner as to open the way for division of a different kind, division 
according to class. 

Finally, it provides the opportunity of utilizing the natural 
wealth of the region and of developing its productive forces in the 
best possible way without awaiting the decisions of a common 
center— functions which are not proper to national cultural 
autonomy. 

Thus regional autonomy is an essential element in the solution 
of the national problem. 

Of course, not one of the regions constitutes a compact, homo- 
geneous nation, for each is interspersed by national minorities. 
Such are the Jews in Poland, the Latvians in Lithuania, the 
Russians in the Caucasus, the Poles in the Ukraine, and so on. It 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 65 

may be feared, therefore, that the minorities will be oppressed by 
the national majorities. But there will be grounds for this fear only 
if the old order continues to prevail in the country. Give the country 
complete democracy and all grounds for this fear will vanish. 

It is proposed to bind the dispersed minorities into a single na- 
tional union. But what minorities want is not an artificial union 
but real rights in the localities they inhabit. What can such a 
union give them without complete democracy? On the other hand, 
what need is there for a national union when there is complete 
democracy? 

What is it that particularly agitates a national minority? 

A minority is discontented not because there is no national union 
but because it does not enjoy the right to use its native language. 
Permit it to use its native language and the discontent will pass of 
itself. 

A minority is discontented not because there is no artificial union 
but because it does not possess its own schools. Give it its own 
schools and all grounds for discontent will disappear. 

A minority is discontented not because there is no national union, 
but because it does not enjoy liberty of conscience, liberty of move- 
ment, etc. Give it these liberties and it will cease to be discontented. 

Thus national equality in all forms (language, schools, and so 
forth) is an essential element in the solution of the national prob- 
lem. A state law based on complete democracy in the country is 
required, prohibiting all national privileges without exception and 
all kinds of disabilities and restrictions on the rights of national 
minorities. 

That, and that alone, is a real, not a paper guarantee of the rights 
of a minority. 

One may or may not deny the existence of a logical connection 
between organizational federalism and national cultural au- 
tonomy. But one cannot deny the fact that the latter creates an 
atmosphere favoring unlimited federalism, which tends towards 
complete rupture, towards separatism. When the Czechs in Austria 
and the Bundists in Russia began with autonomy, passed to 



66 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

federation and ended in separatism, there can be no doubt that an 
important part in this was played by the nationalist atmosphere 
that is naturally generated by national autonomy. It is not for- 
tuitous that national autonomy and organizational federalism go 
hand in hand. It is quite understandable. Both demand division 
according to nationality. Both presume organization on national 
lines. The similarity is beyond question. The only difference is 
that in one case the population generally are divided, while in the 
other it is the Social-Democratic workers who are divided. 

We know whither the division of workers along national lines 
leads. The disintegration of a united working-class party, the divi- 
sion of trade unions along national lines, the aggravation of na- 
tional friction, national strike-breaking, complete demoralization 
within the ranks of the Social-Democratic movement — such are 
the fruits of organizational federalism. This is eloquently borne 
out by the history of Social-Democracy in Austria and the activities 
of the Bund in Russia. 

The only cure for this is organization on internationalist lines. 

The aim must be to unite the workers of all nationalities in 
Russia into united and integral collective bodies in the various 
localities and to unite these collective bodies into a single party. 

It goes without saying that a party structure of this kind does not 
preclude, but on the contrary presumes, wide autonomy for the 
regions within the single party whole. 

The experience of the Caucasus proves the expediency of an or- 
ganization of this type. If the Caucasians have succeeded in over- 
coming the national friction between the Armenian and Tatar 
workers, if they have succeeded in guaranteeing the population 
against massacres and shootings, if in Baku, that kaleidoscope of 
national groups, national collisions are now no longer possible, and 
if it has been possible to draw the workers into the single current 
of a powerful movement — the international structure of Caucasian 
Social-Democracy was not the least factor in bringing this about. 

The type of organization influences not only practical work. It 
stamps an indelible impress on the whole mental life of the 



MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 67 

workers. The worker lives the life of his organization, which stimu- 
lates his intellectual growth and educates him. And thus, moving 
within his organization and continually meeting comrades belong- 
ing to other nationalities and with them fighting a common 
struggle under the leadership of a common collective body, he 
becomes deeply imbued with the idea that workers are primarily 
members of one class family, members of the one army of socialism. 
And this cannot but have a tremendous educational value for 
large sections of the working class. 

And the international type of organization therefore serves as a 
school of fraternal sentiments and is a tremendous agitational fac- 
tor on behalf of internationalism. 

But this is not the case with an organization based on national 
lines. When the workers are organized according to nationality 
they are isolated within their national shells, fenced off from each 
other by organizational partitions. The stress is laid not on what is 
common to the workers but on what distinguishes them from each 
other. In this type of organization the worker is primarily a mem- 
ber of his nation: Jew, Pole, and so on. It is not surprising that 
national federalism in organization inculcates in the workers a 
spirit of national aloofness. 

And therefore the national type of organization is a school of 
national narrow-mindedness and prejudice. 

Thus we are confronted by two fundamentally different types of 
organization: the type based on international unity and the type 
based on the organizational “demarcation” of the workers accord- 
ing to nationality. 

Attempts to reconcile these two types have hitherto been vain. 

The conciliationist rules of the Austrian Social-Democratic Party 
drawn up in Wimberg in 1897 were ineffective. The Austrian 
party fell apart and dragged the trade unions with it. “Reconcilia- 
tion” proved to be not only utopian, but pernicious. Strasser is 
right when he asserts that “separatism achieved its first triumph 
at the Wimberg Party Congress.” 74 

The same is true in Russia. The “reconciliation” with the fed- 



68 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

eralism o£ the Bund which took place at the Stockholm Congress 
ended in a complete fiasco. The Bund violated the Stockholm com- 
promise. Ever since the Stockholm Congress the Bund has been an 
obstacle to the union of the workers in the various localities into a 
single organization which would include the workers of all nation- 
alities. And the Bund has obstinately persisted in its separatist 
tactics in spite of the fact that during both 1907 and 1908 the 
Russian Social-Democratic Party repeatedly demanded that unity 
should be established from below among the workers of all 
nationalities. The Bund, which began with organizational na- 
tional autonomy, in reality passed to federalism, only to end in 
complete rupture and separatism. And by breaking with the 
Russian Social-Democratic Party it caused disharmony and disor- 
ganization within the ranks of the latter. Let us recall the Jagiello 
affair, for instance.* 

The path of “reconciliation” must therefore be discarded as 
utopian and pernicious. 

One thing or the other: either the federalism of the Bund, in 
which case the Russian Social-Democratic Party must re-form itself 
on a basis of “demarcation” of the workers along national lines; or 
an international type of organization, in which case the Bund must 
re-form itself on a basis of territorial autonomy after the pattern 
of the Caucasian, Lettish, and Polish Social-Democratic parties, 
and thus make possible the direct union of the Jewish workers with 
the workers of the other nationalities of Russia. 

There is no middle course: principles triumph, they do not be- 
come “reconciled ” 

Thus the principle of international solidarity of the workers is 
an essential element in the solution of the national problem. 

Vienna, January 1913. 

Prosveshcheniye ( Enlightenment ), Nos. 3-5, March-May 1913. 

* Jagiello was a non-Socialist, elected as deputy to the Fourth Duma from 
Warsaw by a bloc of the Bund and Polish Nationalists. — Ed. 



Report on the National Question 


An extensive report on the national question should rightly be 
given, but time is short and I must make my report brief. 

Before the draft resolution is taken up certain premises must first 
be laid down. What is national oppression ? National oppression is 
that system of exploitation and plunder of subject peoples, those 
measures of forcible restriction of the political rights of subject 
peoples, which are resorted to by imperialist circles. These, taken 
together, present the policy generally known as a policy of national 
oppression. 

The first question is : On what classes does any particular govern- 
ment depend in carrying out its policy of national oppression ? In 
order to obtain an answer to this question it must first be under- 
stood why different forms of national oppression exist in different 
states, why in one state national oppression is more severe and 
crude than in other states. For instance, in Great Britain and 
Austria-Hungary national oppression never took the form of 
pogroms, but existed in the form of restrictions on the national 
rights of the subject peoples; whereas in Russia it not infrequently 
assumes the form of pogroms and massacres. In certain states, on 
the other hand, no specific measures against national minorities 
are practiced at all. For instance, there is no national oppression in 
Switzerland, where French, Italians, and Germans all live freely. 

How are we to explain the difference in attitude towards nation- 
alities existing in different states ? 

The difference depends on the degree of democracy in these 
states. When in former years the old landed aristocracy controlled 
the state power in Russia, national oppression could assume, and 
actually did assume, the monstrous form of massacres and pogroms. 

69 



70 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

In Great Britain, where there is a definite degree of democracy and 
political freedom, national oppression bears a less brutal character, 
Switzerland, for her part, approximates to a democratic society, and 
in that country the small nations have more or less complete free- 
dom. In a word, the more democratic a country, the less the na- 
tional oppression, and vice versa. And since by democracy we 
mean that definite classes are in control of state power, it may be 
said from this point of view that the closer the old landed aris- 
tocracy stands to power, as was the case in old tsarist Russia, the 
more severe is the oppression and the more monstrous the forms 
it assumes. 

However, national oppression is supported not only by the agrar- 
ian aristocracy. There is, in addition, another force — the imperialist 
groups, who transfer the methods of enslaving peoples acquired by 
them in the colonies to their own country itself and thus become 
the natural allies of the landed aristocracy. They are followed by 
the petty bourgeoisie, a section of the intelligentsia, a section of 
the upper strata of the workers, who also enjoy the fruits of the 
plunder. There is thus a whole choir of social forces which support 
national oppression, headed by the landed and financial aristocracy. 
In order to create a real democratic system, it is first necessary to 
clear the soil and remove this choir from the political stage. 

How are we to arrange the political life of the oppressed nations ? 
In answer to this question it must be said that the oppressed nations 
forming part of Russia must be allowed the right to decide for 
themselves whether they wish to remain part of the Russian state 
or to separate and form an independent state. We are at present 
witnessing a definite conflict between the Finnish people and the 
Provisional Government. The representatives of the Finnish 
people, the representatives of Social-Democracy, are demanding 
that the Provisional Government return to the people the rights 
they enjoyed before they were annexed to Russia. The Provisional 
Government refuses because it will not recognize the sovereignty 
of the Finnish people. On whose side must we range ourselves? 
Obviously, on the side of the Finnish people, for it is intolerable 



REPORT ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 7 1 

that we should endorse the forcible retention of any people what- 
soever within the bounds of one state. When we put forward the 
principle of the right of peoples to self-determination we are 
thereby raising the struggle against national oppression to the level 
of a struggle against imperialism, our common foe. Unless we do 
so, we may find ourselves in the position of people who bring grist 
to the mill of the imperialists. If we, the Social-Democrats, were to 
deny the Finnish people the right to declare its will on the subject 
of secession and the right to give effect to its will, we would thereby 
put ourselves in the position of people who continue the policy of 
tsarism. 

The question of the right of nations freely to secede must not be 
confused with the question that a nation must necessarily secede at 
any given moment. This latter question must be settled by the party 
of the proletariat in each particular case independently, according 
to circumstances. When we recognize the right of oppressed 
peoples to secede, the right to determine their political destiny, we 
do not thereby settle the question of whether particular nations 
should secede from the Russian state at the given moment. I may 
recognize the right of a nation to secede, but that does not mean 
that I compel it to secede. A people has a right to secede, but it may 
or may not exercise that right, according to circumstances. Thus 
we are at liberty to agitate for or against secession, according to 
the interests of the proletariat, of the proletarian revolution. Hence, 
the question of secession must be determined in each particular 
case independently, in accordance with existing circumstances, and 
for this reason the question of the recognition of the right to 
secession must not be confused with the expediency of secession 
in any given circumstances. For instance, I personally would be 
opposed to the secession of Transcaucasia, bearing in mind the 
general level of development in Transcaucasia and in Russia, the 
conditions of the struggle of the proletariat, and so forth. But if, 
nevertheless, the peoples of Transcaucasia were to demand seces- 
sion, they would, of course, secede, and would not encounter 
opposition on our part. 



72 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Further, what is to be done with those peoples who may desire 
to remain within the Russian state ? Any mistrust of Russia which 
existed among the peoples was fostered chiefly by the policy of 
tsarism. But now that tsarism no longer exists, its policy of op- 
pression no longer exists, this mistrust is bound to diminish and 
the attraction towards Russia increase. I believe that now, after 
the overthrow of tsarism, nine-tenths of the peoples will not desire 
secession. The party therefore proposes to institute regional au- 
tonomy for regions which may not desire secession and which are 
distinguished by peculiarities of social life and language, as, for 
instance, Transcaucasia, Turkestan and the Ukraine. The geo- 
graphical boundaries of these autonomous regions shall be deter- 
mined by the population itself with due regard for the exigencies of 
economic life, social life, and so forth. 

In contradistinction to regional autonomy there exists another 
plan, one which has long been recommended by the Bund, and par- 
ticularly by Springer and Bauer, who advocate the principle of 
national cultural autonomy. I consider this plan unacceptable for 
the Social-Democratic Party. Its essence is that Russia should be 
transformed into a union of nations, and nations into unions of 
persons drawn into a common society irrespective of where they 
are domiciled in the state. All Russians, all Armenians, and so on, 
are to be organized into separate national unions, irrespective of 
territory, and only then are to enter the union of nations of the 
whole of Russia. This plan is in the highest degree inconvenient 
and inexpedient. The fact is that the development of capitalism has 
dispersed whole groups of people, severed them from their nations 
and scattered them over the various corners of Russia. In view of 
the dispersion of nations resulting from economic conditions, to 
draw together the various individuals of a given nation is to or- 
ganize and build a nation artificially. And to draw people together 
into nations artificially is to adopt the standpoint of nationalism. 
This plan, advanced by the Bund, cannot be endorsed by the 
Social-Democratic Party. It was rejected at the conference of our 
party held in 1912, and generally enjoys no popularity in Social- 



REPORT ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 73 

Democratic circles with the exception of the Bund. This plan is 
also known as cultural autonomy, because it singles out from 
among the numerous and varied questions which interest a nation 
the purely cultural group of questions and places them under the 
charge of national unions. The basis for this selection is the propo- 
sition that what unites a nation into a single whole is its culture. 
It is assumed that within a nation there are, on the one hand, in- 
terests which tend to disintegrate the nation, for instance economic 
interests, and, on the other hand, interests which tend to weld it into 
a single whole, and that the cultural question is a question of the 
latter kind. 

There finally remains the question of the national minorities. 
Their rights must be specifically protected. The party therefore 
demands complete equality of rights in educational, religious, and 
other matters and the removal of all restrictions on national 
minorities. 

There is Par. 9, which proclaims the equality of nations. The 
conditions required for its realization can arise only when the 
whole of society has been fully democratized. 

We have still to settle the question of how to organize the prole- 
tariat of the various nations into a single, common party. One plan 
is that the workers should be organized according to nationality — 
so many nations, so many parties. This plan was rejected by the 
Social-Democratic Party. Experience has shown that the organiza- 
tion of the proletariat of a given state according to nationality only 
leads to the destruction of the idea of class solidarity. All the pro- 
letarian members of all the nations in a given state must be or- 
ganized in a single, indivisible proletarian collective body. 

Thus, our views on the national question reduce themselves to 
the following propositions : (a) the recognition of the right of 
peoples to secession; (b) regional autonomy for peoples which 
remain within the given state; (c) specific laws guaranteeing free- 
dom of development for national minorities; (d) a single, in- 
divisible proletarian collective body, a single party, for the 
proletarians of all the nationalities in the given state. 



74 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 


REPLY TO THE DISCUSSION 

The two resolutions are on the whole similar. Comrade Pyata- 
kov has copied all the points of our resolution except one — “the 
recognition of the right of secession.” One thing or the other: 
either we deny the nations the right of secession, in which case it 
must be stated explicitly, or we do not deny that right. There is at 
present a movement in Finland for securing national freedom, and 
there is also the fight waged against it by the Provisional Govern- 
ment. The question arises, whom are we to support? Either we 
support the policy of the Provisional Government, the forcible 
retention of Finland and the reduction of her rights to a minimum 
— in which case we are annexationists, for we are bringing grist 
to the mill of the Provisional Government — or we favor inde- 
pendence for Finland. We must express ourselves definitely one 
way or the other; to limit ourselves to a statement of rights is 
impossible. There is a movement for independence in Ireland. On 
whose side are we, comrades? We are either for Ireland or for the 
British Empire. And I ask — and the facts of the situation also ask 
— are we on the side of the peoples who are resisting oppression, 
or on the side of the classes which are oppressing them? We say 
that the Social-Democratic Party, which is steering a course to- 
wards the socialist revolution, must support the revolutionary 
movement of the peoples, which is directed against imperialism. 
Either we consider that we must create a rear for the vanguard 
of the socialist revolution in the shape of the peoples which are 
rising up against national oppression — and in that case we shall 
build a bridge between the West and the East and shall indeed 
be steering a course towards the world socialist revolution; or we 
do not do this — and in that case we shall find ourselves isolated 
and we shall be abandoning the tactics of utilizing every revolu- 
tionary movement among the oppressed nationalities for the pur- 
pose of destroying imperialism. We must support every movement 
directed against imperialism. Otherwise, what will the Finnish 
workers say to us? Comrades Pyatakov and Dzerzhinsky say that 



REPORT ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 75 

every national movement is a reactionary movement. That is not 
true, comrades. Is not the Irish movement against British im- 
perialism a democratic movement which is striking a blow at 
imperialism? And are we not to support the movement? . . . 

Delivered April 29 (May 12) , 1917, at the Seventh All- 
Rnssian Conference of the Russian Social-Democratic 
Labor Party, Petrograd. 



The Policy of the Soviet Government 
on the National Question in Russia 


Three years o£ revolution and civil war in Russia have shown 
that unless Central Russia and her border regions mutually support 
each other the success of the revolution and the liberation of Russia 
from the clutches of imperialism will be impossible. Central Russia, 
that hearth of world revolution, cannot hold out long without the 
assistance of the border regions, which abound in raw materials, 
fuel, and foodstuffs. The border regions of Russia in their turn 
are inevitably doomed to imperialist bondage without the political, 
military, and organizational support of more developed Central 
Russia. If the proposition is true that the more developed prole- 
tariat of the West cannot finish the world bourgeoisie without the 
support of the peasant East, which is less developed but which 
abounds in raw materials and fuel, the proposition is equally 
true that more developed Central Russia cannot complete the 
revolution without the support of the border regions of Russia, 
which are less developed but which abound in essential resources. 

This circumstance has undoubtedly been taken into account by 
the Entente ever since the establishment of the Soviet government, 
when it (the Entente) pursued the plan of surrounding Central 
Russia economically by cutting off the more important border 
regions. And the plan of economically surrounding Russia has 
continued to be the unchanging basis of all the campaigns of the 
Entente against Russia, from 1918 to 1920, not excluding its present 
machinations in the Ukraine, Azerbaidjan, and Turkestan. 

All the more important is it, therefore, to achieve a firm alli- 
ance between the center and the border regions of Russia. 

And this means that definite relations, definite ties, must be 
established between the center and the border regions of Russia in 
order to create an intimate and unshakable alliance between them. 

76 



SOVIET POLICY ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 77 

What must these relations be, what forms must they assume? 
In other words, what must be the policy of the Soviet government 
towards the national question in Russia? 

The demand for the secession of the border regions from Russia 
as the form that should be given to the relations between the center 
and the border regions must be rejected not only because it is 
contrary to the very definition of the establishment of an alliance 
between the center and the border regions, but primarily because 
it is fundamentally opposed to the interests of the mass of the 
peoples both of the center and of the border regions. Apart from 
the fact that the separation of the border regions would undermine 
the revolutionary might of Central Russia, which is stimulating 
the movement for the emancipation of the West and the East, the 
seceded border regions themselves would inevitably fall into bond- 
age to international imperialism. One has only to glance at Georgia, 
Armenia, Poland, Finland, and so forth, which have seceded from 
Russia but which have retained only the semblance of independ^ 
ence, while in reality they have been converted into unconditional 
vassals of the Entente; one has only, finally, to recall the recent 
case of the Ukraine and Azerbaidjan, the former of which was 
plundered by German capital and the latter by the Entente, in 
order to realize the counter-revolutionary nature of the demand 
for the secession of the border regions under present international 
conditions. When a life-and-death struggle is being waged, and is 
spreading, between proletarian Russia and the imperialist Entente, 
only two alternatives confront the border regions : 

'Either they join forces with Russia, and then the toiling masses 
of the border regions will be emancipated from imperialist op- 
pression; 

Or they join forces with the Entente, and then the yoke of im- 
perialism is inevitable. 

There is no third solution. So-called independence of a so-called 
independent Georgia, Armenia, Poland, Finland, and so forth, is 
only an illusion, and conceals the utter dependence of these apolo- 
gies for states on one group of imperialists or another. 



78 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Of course, the border regions of Russia, the nations and tribes 
which inh abit these regions, just as all other nations, possess the 
inalienable right to secede from Russia, and if any of these nations 
decided by a majority to secede from Russia, as was the case with 
Finland in 1917, Russia, presumably, would be obliged to record 
the fact and sanction the secession. But the question here is not 
of the indubitable rights of nations, but of the interests of the 
masses of the people both in the center and in the border regions; 
it is a question of the character — determined by these interests — 
of the agitation which our party must carry on if it does not wish 
to repudiate itself and if it wishes to influence the will of the toiling 
masses of the nationalities in a definite direction. And the interests 
of the masses of the people render the demand for the secession 
of the border regions at the present stage of the revolution a pro- 
foundly counter-revolutionary one. 

Similarly, what is known as national cultural autonomy must 
also be rejected as a form of alliance between the center and the 
border regions of Russia. The experience of Austria-Hungary (the 
birthplace of national cultural autonomy) during the last ten years 
has revealed the ephemeral and lifeless character of national cul- 
tural autonomy as a form of alliance between the toiling masses of 
the nationalities of a multi-national state. Springer and Bauer, the 
authors of national cultural autonomy, who now sit lamenting over 
the spilt milk pail of their cunningly contrived national program, 
are living corroborations of the fact. Finally, the spokesman of 
national cultural autonomy in Russia, the once famous Bund, was 
itself recently obliged officially to acknowledge the superfluousness 
of national cultural autonomy by publicly declaring that: 

The demand for national cultural autonomy, which was put 
forward under the capitalist system, loses all meaning in the con- 
ditions of a socialist revolution. 75 

There remains regional autonomy for border regions marked 
by specific social customs and national composition, as the only 
expedient form of alliance between the center and the border 



SOVIET POLICY ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 79 

regions, an autonomy which is designed to connect the border 
regions of Russia with the center by federal ties. This is the Soviet 
form of autonomy proclaimed by the Soviet government from its 
very inception and now being practiced in the border regions in 
the form of administrative communities and autonomous Soviet 
republics. 

Soviet autonomy is not a rigid thing fixed once and for all time; 
it permits of the most varied forms and degrees of development. 
It passes from narrow administrative autonomy (the Volga Ger- 
mans, the Chuvashes and the Karelians) to a wider, political 
autonomy (the Bashkirs, the Volga Tatars and the Kirghiz) ; from 
wide political autonomy to a still wider form of autonomy (the 
Ukraine and Turkestan) ; and finally from the Ukrainian type of 
autonomy to the supreme form of autonomy — contractual relations 
(Azerbaijan). This elasticity of Soviet autonomy constitutes one 
of its prime merits, for this elasticity makes it possible to embrace 
all the various types of border regions in Russia, which vary greatly 
in their levels of cultural and economic development. Three years 
of Soviet policy in the sphere of the national question in Russia 
have shown that in applying Soviet autonomy in its varying forms 
the Soviet government is on the right path, for this policy alone 
made it possible to lay a road to the remotest corners of the border 
regions of Russia, to arouse to political life the most backward 
and nationally diverse masses and to connect these masses with the 
center by the most varied ties — a problem which not a single 
government in the world was solving, or even attempting to solve 
(being afraid to do so!). 

The administrative rearrangement of Russia on the basis of 
Soviet autonomy has not yet been completed; the Northern Cau- 
casians, the Kalmyks, the Cheremisses, the Vots, the Buryats, and 
others, are awaiting a settlement of the question. But no matter 
what aspect the administrative map of the future Russia may 
assume, and no matter what shortcomings there may have been 
in this field — and shortcomings there certainly were — it must be 
acknowledged that by undertaking its administrative reconstruc- 



80 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

tion on the basis o£ regional autonomy Russia has made an ex- 
tremely important stride towards rallying the border regions 
around the proletarian center and bringing the government in 
closer contact with the broad masses of the peoples of the border 
regions. 

But the proclamation of one form of Soviet autonomy or another, 
the enactment of corresponding decrees and ordinances, and even 
the creation of governments in the border regions in the shape 
of regional Councils of People's Commissars of the autonomous 
republics, are far from being all that is required to consolidate 
the alliance between the border regions and the center. In order 
to consolidate this alliance it is first of all necessary to put an 
end to the estrangement and isolation of the border regions, to 
their patriarchal manner of life and lack of culture, and to the 
mistrustful attitude towards the center which still persists in the 
border regions as a heritage of the brutal policy of tsarism. Tsar- 
ism deliberately cultivated patriarchal-feudal oppression in the 
border regions in order to keep the masses in a state of slavery 
and ignorance. Tsarism deliberately settled the best areas in the 
border regions with colonizers in order to force the natives into 
the worst areas and to intensify national enmity. Tsarism restricted, 
and at times simply suppressed, the native schools, theaters, and 
educational institutions in order to keep the masses in intellectual 
darkness. Tsarism frustrated the initiative of the best members of 
the native population. Finally, tsarism suppressed all activity on 
the part of the populace of the border regions. Tsarism in this 
way implanted among the natives a profound mistrust, at times 
passing into direct hostility, for everything Russian. 

If the alliance between Central Russia and the border regions is 
to be consolidated, this mistrust must be removed and an atmos- 
phere of mutual understanding and fraternal confidence created. 
But in order to remove this mistrust we must first help the populace 
of the border regions to emancipate themselves from the survivals 
of the feudal-patriarchal yoke; we must abolish — abolish in actual 
fact and not in word — all the privileges of the colonizers; we must 



SOVIET POLICY ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 8 1 

enable the masses to taste of the material benefits of the revolution. 
In brief, we must prove to the masses that Central, proletarian 
Russia is defending their interests, and their interests alone; and 
this must be proved not only by resorting to repressive measures 
against the colonizers and the bourgeois nationalists, measures that 
are frequently incomprehensible to the masses, but primarily by a 
consistent and well-conceived economic policy. 

Everyone is acquainted with the liberals’ demand for universal 
compulsory education. Communists in the border regions cannot 
be more Right than the liberals; they must put universal education 
into effect if they want to end the ignorance of the people and if 
they want to create closer spiritual ties between the center of 
Russia and the border regions. But in order to do so we must 
develop local national schools, national theaters and national edu- 
cational institutions and must raise the cultural level of the peoples 
of the border regions. For it need hardly be shown that ignorance 
and unenlightenment are the most dangerous enemies of Soviet 
government. We do not know what success is attending our work 
in this field generally, but we are informed that in one of the most 
important border regions the local People’s Commissariat of 
Education is expending on the native schools only ten per cent of 
its available credits. If this is true, it must be confessed that in this 
field we have unfortunately not progressed much on the “old 
regime.” 

The Soviet government is not a government divorced from the 
people; on the contrary, it is the only government of its kind, a 
government which originated among the masses of Russian people 
and which is near and dear to the people. This in fact explains 
the unparalleled strength and resilience displayed by the Soviet 
government at critical moments. The Soviet government must be- 
come no less near and dear to the populace of the border regions 
of Russia. But to do so the Soviet government must first be com- 
prehensible to them. It is therefore necessary that all Soviet organs 
in the border regions — the courts, the administration, the economic 
bodies, the direct organs of government (as also the organs of the 



82 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

party) — should as far as possible be recruited from among local 
people acquainted with the customs, life, habits, and language of 
the native population; that the best people from among the native 
masses should be got to participate in these institutions; that the 
local toiling masses should be drawn into every sphere of adminis- 
tration of the country, including military formations, in order 
that the masses may see that the Soviet government and its organs 
are the products of their own efforts, the embodiment of their 
aspirations. Only in this way can an unbreakable spiritual contact 
be established between the masses and the government, and only 
in this way can the Soviet government become comprehensible and 
dear to the toiling masses of the border regions. 

Certain comrades regard the autonomous republics in Russia 
and Soviet autonomy generally as a temporary, if necessary, evil 
which must for certain reasons be tolerated, but which must be 
resisted so that it may one day be abolished. It need hardly be 
shown that such a view is essentially false and that at any rate 
it is entirely foreign to the policy of the Soviet government on 
the national question. Soviet autonomy is not an abstraction or 
artificial thing; still less is it an empty and declarative promise. 
Soviet autonomy is the most real and concrete way of uniting the 
border regions to Central Russia. Nobody will deny that the 
Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Turkestan, the Kirghiz Republic, the Bash- 
kir Republic, the Tatar Republic, and other border regions, since 
they are striving for the cultural and material prosperity of their 
masses, must have their native schools, courts, administration and 
government bodies recruited principally from among the native 
people. Furthermore, the real Sovietization of these regions, their 
conversion into Soviet countries closely bound to Central Russia 
and forming with it one state whole, is inconceivable without the 
widespread organization of local schools, without the creation of 
courts, administrative bodies, organs of government, and so forth, 
recruited from among people acquainted with the life and lan- 
guage of the population. But to conduct the schools, courts, the 
administration and organs of government in the native language 



SOVIET POLICY ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 83 

means precisely putting Soviet autonomy into practice; for Soviet 
autonomy is but the sum of these various institutions enveloped 
in a Ukrainian, Turkestanian or Kirghiz form. 

How, after this, can one seriously say that Soviet autonomy is 
ephemeral, that it must be resisted, and so forth? 

One thing or the other: 

Either the Ukrainian, Azerbaijanian, Kirghiz, Uzbek, Bash- 
kir, and the other languages are a reality, and it is therefore 
absolutely essential to develop in these regions native schools, 
courts, administrative bodies, and organs of government recruited 
from among native people — in which case Soviet autonomy in 
these regions must be put into effect in its entirety, without any 
reservations whatsoever; 

Or the Ukrainian, Azerbaidjanian, and other languages are a 
pure fiction, and therefore schools and other institutions in the 
native language are unnecessary — in which case Soviet autonomy 
must be discarded as useless lumber. 

The search for a third way is due either to ignorance of the 
subject or to deplorable superficiality. 

One of the most serious obstacles to the realization of Soviet 
autonomy is the acute shortage of intellectual forces of local origin 
in the border regions, the shortage of instructors in every branch 
of Soviet and party work without exception. This shortage cannot 
but hamper both educational and revolutionary constructive work 
in the border regions. But for this very reason it would be unwise 
and harmful to alienate the all too few groups of native intellec- 
tuals, who perhaps would like to serve the masses of the people 
but are unable to do so, perhaps because, not being Communists, 
they believe themselves to be surrounded by an atmosphere of 
mistrust and are afraid of possible measures of repression. The 
policy of drawing such groups into Soviet work, the policy of 
recruiting them for economic, agrarian, food-administrative, and 
similar posts, with the purpose of their gradual Sovietization, may 
be successfully applied. For it will hardly be maintained that these 
intellectual groups are less reliable than, let us say, the counter- 



84 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

revolutionary military experts who, their counter-revolution not- 
withstanding, were appointed to work at important posts and 
were subsequently Sovietized. 

But the employment of national groups of intellectuals will still 
be far from sufficient to satisfy the demand for instructors. We 
must simultaneously develop in the border regions a wide net- 
work of lecture courses and schools on every branch of adminis- 
tration in order to create cadres of instructors from among local 
people. For it is clear that without such cadres the organization of 
native schools, courts, administration, and other institutions in 
the native tongue will be difficult in the extreme. 

A no less serious obstacle to the realization of Soviet autonomy 
is the precipitance, at times assuming the form of gross tactless- 
ness, displayed by certain comrades in the matter of Sovietizing 
the border regions. When such comrades, in regions which are a 
whole historical period behind Central Russia, in regions where 
the medieval order has not yet been wholly abolished, take upon 
themselves the “heroic task” of applying “pure communism,” we 
may safely say that no good will come of such cavalry raids, of 
“communism” of this kind. We should like to remind our com- 
rades of the point in our program which says: 

The Communist Party of Russia adopts the historical class view- 
point, and in this takes into consideration the stage of historical de- 
velopment of the given nation: whether it is evolving from medi- 
evalism to bourgeois democracy, or from bourgeois democracy to 
Soviet or proletarian democracy, etc. 

And further: 

In any case, the proletariat of the nations which have been oppress- 
ing nations must exercise special caution and pay special attention to 
the survivals of national sentiment among the toiling masses of op- 
pressed or non-sovereign nations . 76 

That means that if, for instance, the direct method of appro- 
priating superfluous dwelling space in Azerbaidjan tends to 
alienate from us the Azerbaidjanian masses, who regard the home, 
the domestic hearth, as holy and inviolable, it is obvious that the 



SOVIET POLICY ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 85 

direct method of appropriating superfluous dwelling space must 
be replaced by an indirect method of achieving the same end. Or 
further, if, for instance, the Daghestanian masses, who are pro- 
foundly imbued with religious prejudices, follow the Communists 
“on the basis of the Shariah, # it is obvious that the direct method 
of combating religious prejudices in this country must be replaced 
by indirect and more cautious methods. And so on and so forth. 

In brief, cavalry raids with the object of “immediately com- 
munizing” the backward masses of the people must be discarded 
for a cautious and well-conceived policy of gradually drawing 
these masses into the general stream of Soviet development. 

Such in general are the practical conditions necessary for realiz- 
ing Soviet autonomy, the introduction of which will bring about 
closer spiritual relations and a firm revolutionary alliance between 
the center and the border regions of Russia. 

Soviet Russia is performing an experiment, without parallel 
anywhere in the world, in organizing the coexistence of a number 
of nations and tribes within a single proletarian state on a basis of 
mutual confidence and voluntary and fraternal good-will. Three 
years of revolution show that this experiment has every chance of 
success. But this experiment can be certain of complete success 
only if our practical policy with regard to the national problem 
in the various localities does not run counter to the demands of 
Soviet autonomy already proclaimed in its varied forms and de- 
grees of application, and if every practical measure we take in the 
various localities contributes to bringing the masses of the people 
in the border regions to partake of a higher, proletarian spiritual 
and material culture in forms which correspond to the social 
habits and national features of these masses. 

And this will be a guarantee of the consolidation of the revolu- 
tionary alliance between Central Russia and the border regions of 
Russia against which all the machinations of the Entente will 
suffer shipwreck. 

Pravda, No. 226, October 10, 1920. 

* The Mohammedan code. — Ed. 



Theses on the Immediate Tasks of the Party 
in Connection with the National Question 


I. THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM AND NATIONAL 
OPPRESSION 

1. Modern nations are a product of a definite epoch — the epoch 
of rising capitalism. The process of the abolition of feudalism and 
the development of capitalism was also the process of formation 
of people into nations. The British, French, Germans, and Italians 
formed into nations during the victorious march of capitalism and 
its triumph over feudal disunity. 

2. Where the formation of nations on the whole coincided in 
time with the formation of centralized states, the nations naturally 
became invested in a state integument and developed into inde- 
pendent bourgeois national states. Such was the case with Great 
Britain (without Ireland), France, and Italy. In Eastern Europe, 
on the other hand, the formation of centralized states, accelerated 
by the exigencies of self-defense (against the invasions of the 
Turks, Mongols, and others), took place prior to the break-up of 
feudalism and therefore prior to the formation of nations. Here, 
as a result, the nations did not, and could not, develop into na- 
tional states, but formed into several mixed, multi-national bour- 
geois states, consisting usually of one powerful, dominant nation 
and several weak, subject nations. Such are Austria, Hungary, 
and Russia. 

3. National states, such as France and Italy, depending at first 
mainly on their own national forces, were generally speaking 
unacquainted with national oppression. In contradistinction, the 
multi-national states, based as they are on the domination of one 
nation — or rather of its ruling class — over the other nations, were 

86 



THESES ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 87 

the original home and the chief scene of national oppression and 
national movements. The contradictions between the interests of 
the ruling nations and the interests of the subject nations are such 
that unless they are solved the stable existence of multi-national 
states becomes impossible. The tragedy of the multi-national bour- 
geois state is that it is unable to overcome these contradictions and 
that every attempt it makes to ‘level” the nations and “protect” 
the national minorities while preserving private property and 
class inequality usually ends in a new failure and a further intensi- 
fication of national hostilities. 

4. The subsequent growth of capitalism in Europe, the need for 
new markets, the search for raw materials and fuel, and, finally, 
the development of imperialism, the export of capital, and the ne- 
cessity of protecting the great sea and rail routes, have led, on the 
one hand, to the seizure of new territories by die old national states 
and the conversion of the latter into multi-national (colonial) states 
with the national oppression and national conflicts natural to multi- 
national states (Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy) and, on 
the other hand, have intensified the strivings of the dominant na- 
tions in the old multi-national states not merely to preserve the old 
state boundaries but to extend them and to subjugate new (weak) 
nationalities at the expense of neighboring states. In this way the 
national problem was enlarged and finally, in the very course of 
events, became merged with the general problem of the colonies; 
while national oppression was transformed from an internal ques- 
tion into an inter-state question, into a question of conflict (and 
war) between the “Great” imperialist powers for the subjugation 
of weak and non-sovereign nationalities. 

5. The imperialist war, which exposed to their very roots the 
irreconcilable national contradictions and the internal insolvency 
of the bourgeois multi-national states, led to an extreme aggrava- 
tion of national conflicts within the victorious colonial states (Great 
Britain, France, Italy), to the complete disintegration of the de- 
feated former multi-national states (Austria, Hungary, Russia in 
1917) and, finally — as the most “radical” solution of the national 



88 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

problem of which the bourgeoisie is capable — to the formation of 
new bourgeois national states (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugo- 
slavia, Finland, Georgia, Armenia, etc.)* But the formation of new 
independent national states did not result, and could not result, in 
the peaceful coexistence of nationalities, and did not eliminate, and 
could not eliminate, either national inequality or national oppres- 
sion; for the new national states, based as they are on private prop- 
erty and class inequality, cannot exist (a) without oppressing their 
own national minorities (Poland, which oppresses the White- 
Russians, Jews, Lithuanians and Ukrainians; Georgia, which op- 
presses the Ossets, Abkhasians and Armenians; Yugoslavia, which 
oppresses the Croats and Bosnians, and others) ; (b) without ex- 
tending their territories at the expense of their neighbors, which 
leads to conflict and war (Poland against Lithuania, the Ukraine 
and Russia; Yugoslavia against Bulgaria; Georgia against Armenia 
and Turkey, and so on) ; and (c) without becoming subject finan- 
cially, economically and militarily to the “Great” imperialist 
powers. 

6. Thus the post-war period presents a gloomy picture of na- 
tional enmity, inequality, oppression, conflict, war, and imperialist 
brutality on the part of the nations of civilized countries both to- 
wards each other and towards the non-sovereign peoples: on the 
one hand we have a few Great Powers, which oppress and exploit 
the mass of dependent and “independent” (but in fact wholly de- 
pendent) national states, and the struggle of these powers among 
themselves for the monopoly of exploiting the national states; and 
on the other hand we have the struggle of the national states, de- 
pendent and “independent,” against the intolerable oppression of 
the Great Powers; the struggle of the national states among them- 
selves for the extension of their national territory; the struggle of 
the national states, each in particular, against its own oppressed 
national minorities; and, finally, the growth of the movement for 
emancipation on the part of the colonies against the Great Powers 
and the intensification of national conflicts both within these 
powers and within the national states, which as a rule contain a 



THESES ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 89 

number of national minorities. Such is the “world picture” inherited 
from the imperialist war. 

Bourgeois society has proved to be utterly bankrupt in the matter 
of solving the national problem. 


II. THE SOVIET SYSTEM AND NATIONAL FREEDOM 

1. Whereas private property and capital inevitably disunite peo- 
ple, inflame national enmity, and intensify national oppression, 
collective property and labor just as inevitably bring people closer 
and undermine national oppression. The existence of capitalism 
without national oppression is just as inconceivable as the existence 
of socialism without the emancipation of oppressed nations, with- 
out national freedom. Chauvinism and national conflict are inevit- 
able, unavoidable, as long as the peasantry (and the petty bour- 
geoisie generally) is permeated with nationalist prejudices and 
follows the bourgeoisie; while, on the contrary, national peace and 
national freedom may be regarded as assured when the peasantry 
follows the proletariat, that is to say, when the dictatorship of the 
proletariat has been secured. Hence the triumph of the Soviets 
and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat is a basic 
condition for the abolition of national oppression, the institution of 
national equality and the guarantee of the rights of national 
minorities. 

2. The experience of the Soviet revolution entirely bears out this 
assertion. The establishment of a Soviet system in Russia and the 
declaration of the right of nations to political secession have 
brought about a complete change in the relations between the toil- 
ing masses of the nationalities of Russia; they have undermined the 
old national enmity, deprived national oppression of its founda- 
tion, won for the Russian workers the confidence of their brothers 
of other nationalities, not only in Russia, but also in Europe and 
Asia, and have raised this confidence to a pitch of enthusiasm and 
readiness to fight for the common cause. The creation of Soviet 
republics in Azerbaidjan and Armenia has been productive of 



gO MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

similar results and has put an end to national collisions and the 
“age-old” enmity between the Turkish and Armenian toiling 
masses and between the Armenian and Azerbaijanian toiling 
masses. The same must be said of the temporary success of the 
Soviets in Hungary, Bavaria, Finland, and Latvia. On the other 
hand, it may safely be said that the Russian workers could not have 
defeated Kolchak and Denikin, and the Azerbaidjan and Armen- 
ian Republics could not have been put on their feet without the 
elimination of national enmity and national oppression at home, 
and without the confidence and enthusiasm displayed towards 
them by the toiling masses of the nationalities of the West and the 
East. The consolidation of the Soviet republics and the abolition 
of national oppression are two aspects of one and the same process 
of emancipation of the toilers from imperialist bondage. 

3. But the existence of the Soviet republics, even the smallest in 
size, represents a fatal menace to imperialism. This menace lies not 
merely in the fact that the Soviet republics, having broken away 
from imperialism, have been converted from colonies and semi- 
colonies into really independent states and have thereby deprived 
the imperialists of a certain part of their territories and revenues, 
but also, and primarily, in the fact that the very existence of the 
Soviet republics, and every step taken by these republics in the 
direction of suppressing the bourgeoisie and consolidating the dic- 
tatorship of the proletariat, is a great piece of agitation against 
capitalism and imperialism, agitation for the emancipation of 
dependent countries from imperialist bondage, and an insuperable 
factor in the disintegration and disorganization of capitalism in all 
its forms. Hence the inevitability of the struggle of the “Great” 
imperialist powers against the Soviet republics and the endeavors 
of the Great Powers to annihilate these republics. The history of 
the struggle of the Great Powers against Soviet Russia, in which 
they are raising against her one bourgeois border government after 
another and one group of counter-revolutionary generals after an- 
other, carefully blockading her and generally endeavoring to iso- 
late her economically, furnishes eloquent testimony to the fact that 



THESES ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 9 1 

under present international conditions, under the conditions of a 
capitalist encirclement, not a single Soviet republic taken alone can 
regard itself as secure against economic exhaustion and military 
destruction on the part of world imperialism. 

4. Hence, in isolation, the existence of the various Soviet repub- 
lics is uncertain and unstable, because of the menace to their exist- 
ence offered by the capitalist states. The joint interests of the Soviet 
republics in the matter of defense, in the first place, the restoration 
of the productive forces shattered during the war, in the second 
place, and the fact that the Soviet republics which are rich in food 
must come to the aid of the Soviet republics which are poor in 
food, in the third place, all imperatively dictate the political union 
of the various Soviet republics as the only means of escaping im- 
perialist bondage and national oppression. Having liberated them- 
selves from their “own” and “foreign” bourgeoisies, the national 
Soviet republics can defend their existence and defeat the combined 
forces of imperialism only by amalgamating themselves into a close 
political union, or not at all. 

5. A federation of Soviet republics based on common military 
and economic affairs is that general form of political union which 
makes it possible (a) to guarantee the integrity and economic devel- 
opment both of the individual republics and of the federation as a 
whole; (b) to embrace the various social, cultural, and economic 
conditions of the various nations and peoples, which are at different 
levels of development, and accordingly to apply one form of feder- 
ation or another, and (c) to bring about the peaceful coexistence 
and fraternal collaboration of the nations and peoples which have 
in one form or another thrown in their lot with that of the federa- 
tion. The experience of Russia in applying various forms of federa- 
tion, passing from federation based on Soviet autonomy (the Kir- 
ghiz Republic, the Bashkir Republic, the Tatar Republic, the 
Gortsi, Daghestan) to federation based on contractual relations 
between independent Soviet republics (the Ukraine, Azerbaidjan), 
with intermediate phases (Turkestan, White Russia), has fully 



92 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

proved the value and flexibility of federation as a general form of 
political union for the Soviet republics. 

6. But federation may be durable, and the results of federation 
real, only if it is based on mutual confidence and the voluntary 
consent of the countries constituting the federation. If the Russian 
Soviet Federative Socialist Republic is the only country in the 
world in which the experiment in the peaceable coexistence and 
fraternal collaboration of a large number of nations and peoples 
has succeeded, it is because it contains neither ruling nor subject 
peoples, neither mother countries nor colonies, neither imperialism 
nor national oppression. In the R.S.F.S.R. federation rests on 
mutual confidence and a voluntary desire for union on the part 
of the toiling masses of the various nations. This voluntary char- 
acter of the federation must absolutely be preserved m the future, 
for only a federation of this kind can serve as a transition stage to 
that supreme unity of the toilers of all countries in a single world 
economic system the necessity for which is growing more and more 
palpable. 

III. IMMEDIATE TASKS OF THE RUSSIAN 
COMMUNIST PARTY 

i. The R.S.F.S.R. and its allied Soviet republics are representa- 
tive of a population of about 140,000,000 people. Of these the non- 
Great-Russian peoples amount to about 65,000,000 (Ukrainians, 
White-Russians, Kirghiz, Uzbeks, Turkmens, Tadjiks, Azerbai- 
janians, Volga Tatars, Crimean Tatars, Bokharans, Khivans, Bash- 
kirs, Armenians, Chechens, Kabardians, Ossets, Circassians, 
Ingushes, Karachais, Balkarians,* Kalmucks, Karelians, Avarians, 
Darghis, Kazikumukhians, Kurins, Kumyks, f Maris, Chuvashes, 
Vots, Volga Germans, Buryats, Yakutians, etc.). The policy of 

* The Chechens, Kabardians, Ossets, Circassians, Ingushes, Karachais, and 
Balkarians form the Gortsi group of peoples. 

fThe Avarians, Darghis, Kazikumukhians, Kurins, and Kumyks form the 
Daghestanian group of peoples. 



THESES ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 93 

tsarism, the policy of the landlords and the bourgeoisie, towards 
these peoples was to destroy every germ of statehood among them, 
to cripple their culture, restrict the use of their native tongue, hold 
them in a state of ignorance, and, finally, as far as possible, to 
Russify them. The effects of this policy are reflected in the low level 
of development and political backwardness of these peoples. 

Now that the landlords and bourgeoisie have been overthrown 
and a Soviet government has been proclaimed by the masses of 
the people in these countries also, the task of the party is to help 
the toiling masses of the non-Great-Russian peoples to catch up 
with Central Russia, which is ahead of them, and to help them 
(a) to develop and consolidate their own Soviet state system in 
forms consistent with the national character of these peoples; (b) 
to organize their own courts, administrative bodies, economic or- 
gans and government organs functioning in the native language 
and recruited from among local people acquainted with the cus- 
toms and psychology of the local population, and (c) to develop a 
press, schools, theaters, clubs, and cultural and educational institu- 
tions generally, functioning in the native language. 

2. If from the 65,000,000 of the non-Great-Russian population 
we exclude the Ukraine, White Russia, a small part of Azerbaijan, 
and Armenia, which in a more or less degree have passed through 
the period of industrial capitalism, there remain about 30,000,000, 
consisting principally of Turkic peoples (Turkestan, the greater 
part of Azerbaidjan, Daghestan, the Gortsi, Tatars, Bashkirs, Kir- 
ghiz, and others), who have not passed through a capitalist devel- 
opment, who do not, or practically do not, possess an industrial 
proletariat of their own, who in the majority of cases preserve the 
pastoral and patriarchal tribal form of life (Kirkhizia, Bashkiria, 
the Northern Caucasus), or who have not yet progressed beyond 
a primitive semi-patriarchal, semi-feudal form of life (Azerbaidjan, 
the Crimea, and others), but who have already been drawn into the 
common current of Soviet development. 

The duty of the party towards the toiling masses of these peoples 
(in addition to the duties set forth in Par. 1) is to assist them in 



94 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

eliminating the survivals of patriarchal-feudal relations and in join- 
ing in the work of building up a Soviet economic system on the 
basis of Soviets of toiling peasants, by creating among these peoples 
strong Communist organizations capable of utilizing the experi- 
ence gained by the Russian workers and peasants in Soviet and 
economic development and at the same time capable of adapting 
their constructive work to the peculiarities of the concrete economic 
conditions, class structure, culture and habits of each particular peo- 
ple, instead of mechanically transplanting the economic measures 
of Central Russia, which are adapted to a different, and higher 
stage of economic development. 

3. If from these 30,000,000, consisting principally of Turkic peo- 
ples, we exclude Azerbaidjan, the greater part of Turkestan, the 
Volga and the Crimean Tatar Republics, Bokhara, Khiva, Daghes- 
tan, a part of the Gortsi (Kabardians, Circassians, Balkarians) and 
several other peoples which have already become settled and per- 
manently attached to a definite territory, there remain about 
10,000,000 Kirghiz, Bashkirs, Chechens, Ossets and Ingushes, 
whose lands until recently had been subject to colonization by 
Russian settlers, the latter having already seized the best of their 
arable land, systematically forcing them into the sterile desert. The 
policy of tsarism, the policy of the landlords and the bourgeoisie, 
was to settle these parts with the greatest possible number of 
kulaks from among the Russian peasants and the Cossacks, and to 
make the latter a reliable basis for Great-Power ambitions. This 
policy led to the gradual extermination of the natives (Kirghiz, 
Bashkirs) who had been forced into the sterile wilderness. 

The duty of the party in relation to the toiling masses of these 
peoples (in addition to the duties enumerated in Pars. 1 and 2) 
is to unite their efforts with the efforts of the toiling masses of the 
local Russian population in the struggle for emancipation from the 
kulaks in general and from the predatory Great Russian kulaks in 
particular, to help them in every way to throw off the yoke of the 
kulak colonizers and thus to provide them with land suitable and 
essential for human subsistence. 



THESES ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 95 

4. In addition to the nations and peoples already mentioned, 
possessing a definite class structure and occupying definite terri- 
tory, there exist within the R.S.F.SJR. various casual national 
groups, national minorities, interspersed among compact majori- 
ties of other nations, who in most cases neither possess a definite 
class structure nor occupy a definite territory (Letts, Esthonians, 
Poles, Jews, and others) . The policy of tsarism was to exterminate 
these minorities by every possible means, including massacre (Jew- 
ish pogroms) . 

Now that national privileges have been abolished and the equal- 
ity of nationalities established, and the right of national minorities 
to free national development is guaranteed by the very nature of 
the Soviet system, the duty of the party towards the toiling masses 
of these national groups is to help them to make the fullest possible 
use of the right to free development which they have secured, 

5. The development of Communist organizations in the border 
regions is taking place under rather peculiar circumstances, which 
tend to hinder the normal growth of the party in these parts. On 
the one hand, the Great-Russian Communists working in these re- 
gions, who have grown up under the conditions of a “sovereign” 
nation, and who have never known national oppression, not in- 
frequently minimize the importance of national peculiarities in 
party work, or else ignore them altogether, and fail in their work 
to reckon with the peculiarities of class structure, culture, social 
life, and historical past of the given people, and so vulgarize and 
distort the policy of the party on the national question. This cir- 
cumstance leads to a deviation from communism towards the 
dominant-power spirit, the colonizing spirit, the spirit of Great- 
Russian chauvinism. On the other hand, the native Communists, 
who have lived through the painful period of national oppression 
and have not entirely ceased to be haunted by the horrors of that 
period, not infrequently exaggerate the importance of national 
peculiarities in party work, leave the class interests of the toilers 
in the background, or else simply identify the interests of the 
toilers of the given nation with the “general national” interests of 



g6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

that nation, failing to pick out the former from the latter and to 
base their party work on them. This circumstance in its turn leads 
to a deviation from communism towards bourgeois-democratic 
nationalism, which at times assumes the form of Pan-Islamism 
and Pan-Turkism (in the East). 

The congress, emphatically condemning both these deviations as 
harmful and dangerous to the cause of communism, deems it nec- 
essary to point out the particular danger and the particular harm 
of the first deviation, the deviation towards the Great-Power spirit, 
the colonizing spirit. The congress calls attention to the fact that 
unless colonizing and nationalist survivals within the ranks of the 
party are eliminated it will be impossible in the border regions to 
create strong, genuinely Communist organizations closely bound 
up with the masses and uniting within their ranks the proletarian 
elements of the native and Russian populations on the basis of 
internationalism. The congress therefore considers that one of the 
main tasks of the party in the border regions is to eliminate the 
nationalist, and particularly the colonizer, vacillations among the 
Communists. 

6. In connection with the successes achieved on the military 
fronts, and particularly since the liquidation of Wrangel, in some 
of the backward border regions which do not possess, or practically 
do not possess, an industrial proletariat, there is an increased urge 
on the part of petty-bourgeois nationalist elements to join the party 
for careerist purposes. These elements, realizing that the party is 
the virtual r ulin g power, usually adopt the coloring of communism 
and not infrequently strive to join die party in whole groups, bring- 
ing with them a spirit of ill-concealed chauvinism and corruption; 
and the party organizations in the border regions, which are gen- 
erally weak, are not always able to withstand the temptation 
of “ enlar ging” the party by the admission of new members. 

The congress calls for a vigorous struggle against all pseudo- 
Communist elements who have wormed themselves into the party 
of the proletariat, and warns the party against the temptation of 
“ enlar ging” itself by the admission of intellectual, petty-bourgeois 



THESES ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 97 

nationalist elements. The congress considers that reinforcements 
to the ranks of the party in the border regions must be recruited 
chiefly from among the proletarians and the poor and toiling 
peasants of those regions and that at the same time activities must 
be directed to strengthening the party organizations in the border 
regions by improving the quality of the membership. 

Theses at the Tenth Congress o£ the Russian Com- 
munist Party, March, 1921. 

Pravda, Na 29, March 10, 1921. 



Report on the Immediate Tasks of the Party 
in Connection with the National Problem 


Before proceeding directly to the concrete immediate tasks of 
the party in connection with the national problem, we must first 
lay down certain premises without which the solution of the 
national problem is impossible. These premises relate to the ap- 
pearance of nations, the origin of national oppression, the forms 
assumed by national oppression in the course of historical develop- 
ment, and, finally, the forms of solution of the national problem 
in the various periods of development. 

There are three such periods. 

The first period is the period which saw the break-up of feudal- 
ism in the West and the triumph of capitalism. The formation of 
people into nations occurred during this period. I am referring to 
such countries as Great Britain (without Ireland), France, and 
Italy. In the West — in Great Britain, France, Italy, and partly in 
Germany — the period of the break-up of feudalism and the for- 
mation of people into nations on the whole coincided in time with 
the period which saw the appearance of the centralized states, and 
as a result the nations in their development became invested in 
state forms. And inasmuch as there were no other national groups 
of any considerable size within these states, such a thing as na- 
tional oppression was not known. In Eastern Europe, on the con- 
trary, the process of formation of nationalities and the elimination 
of feudal disunity did not coincide in time with the process of 
formation of centralized states. I am referring to Hungary, Aus- 
tria, and Russia. In these countries capitalist development had not 
yet begun; it was perhaps only incipient; but the necessity of 
taking defensive measures against the invasions of the Turks, 
Mongols, and other Oriental peoples demanded that centralized 

98 



REPORT ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 99 

states capable of withstanding the onslaught of the invaders 
should be formed without delay. And since in Eastern Europe the 
process of formation of centralized states proceeded more rapidly 
than the process of formation of people into nations, mixed states 
arose, each made up of several nationalities which had not yet 
formed themselves into nations but which were already united in 
a common state. 

Thus, the first period is marked by the appearance of national- 
ities in the dawn of capitalism: in Western Europe we observe the 
birth of purely national states to which national oppression is un- 
known, whereas in the East we observe the birth of multi-national 
states with one more developed nation at the head and the re- 
maining, less developed, nations in a state of political, and later 
of economic, subjection to the dominant nation. These multi- 
national states of the East were the birthplace of that national 
oppression which gave rise to national conflicts, national move- 
ments, the national problem, and the various methods of solving 
that problem. 

The second period in the development of national oppression 
and the methods of combating it coincides with the period which 
saw the appearance of imperialism; when capitalism, in its search 
for markets, raw materials, fuel, and cheap labor power, and in 
the competition for the export of capital and the possession of the 
great rail and sea routes, breaks out of the confines of the national 
state and extends its territory at the expense of near and distant 
neighbors. In this second period, the old national states in the 
West — Great Britain, Italy, and France — cease to be national states; 
in other words, by virtue of the seizure of new territories they 
become converted into multi-national, colony-owning states, and 
thereby come to be an arena for that national and colonial oppres- 
sion which already exists in Eastern Europe. In Eastern Europe 
this period is marked by the awakening and invigoration of sub- 
ject nations (Czechs, Poles, Ukrainians), which, as a result of the 
imperialist war, have led to the dissolution of the old bourgeois 



100 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

multi-national states and the formation of new national states 
enthralled to what are known as the Great Powers. 

The third period is the Soviet period, the period of the destruc- 
tion of capitalism and the abolition of national oppression; in 
which the question of ruling and subject nations, of colonies and 
mother countries, is being consigned to the archives of history; in 
which, on the territory of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist 
Republic, we see nationalities which possess equality of rights and 
equal opportunities for development, but which still preserve a 
certain historical heritage of inequality owing to their economic, 
political, and cultural backwardness. The substance of this in- 
equality of nationalities consists in the fact that, as a result of 
historical development, we have received a heritage from the past 
by virtue of which one nationality, the Great-Russian nationality, 
is more developed politically and industrially than the other na- 
tionalities. Hence the existence of actual inequality, which cannot 
be eradicated in one year, but which must be eradicated, and 
eradicated by economic, political, and cultural assistance being ren- 
dered to the backward nationalities. 

These are the three periods of development of the national prob- 
lem known to us historically. 

The first two periods have one feature in common. It is that in 
both these periods the nationalities suffered oppression and en- 
slavement, as a result of which the national struggle continued to 
be fought and the national problem remained unsolved. But there 
is also a difference between them. It is that in the first period the 
national problem did not extend beyond the boundaries of the 
various multi-national states and embraced only a few, mainly 
European, nationalities; whereas in the second period the national 
problem became converted from an internal problem of each par- 
ticular state into a problem mutually affecting several states — into 
a problem of war between imperialist states waged with the object 
of retaining the non-sovereign nationalities under the sway of the 
latter and of subjugating new nationalities and tribes outside 
Europe. Thus the ^national problem, which was formerly of mo- 



REPORT ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS 1 01 

ment only in the more cultured countries, lost its isolated character 
in this period and merged with the general problem o£ the 
colonies. 

The development o£ the national problem into a general prob- 
lem of the colonies is not a historical accident. It is due, first, to the 
fact that during the imperialist war the imperialist groups of 
belligerent powers were themselves obliged to appeal to the colo- 
nies, from which they recruited the man-power that went to form 
armies. Unquestionably, this process, by which the imperialists 
were inevitably constrained to appeal to the backward peoples of 
the colonies, could not but awaken in these tribes and peoples the 
the desire for emancipation and for struggle. There is another fac- 
tor which caused the national problem to extend, to develop Into 
a general problem of the colonies and to spread over the whole 
surface of the globe, first in isolated sparks and then in the flames 
of the movement for emancipation. This factor was the attempt 
of the imperialist groups to dismember Turkey and put an end to 
her existence as a state. Turkey, the country which among the 
Mohammedan peoples is politically the most developed, could 
not reconcile herself to such a prospect. She raised the standard of 
war and rallied the peoples of the East against imperialism. A 
third factor was the appearance of Soviet Russia, whose struggle 
against imperialism has met with several successes and has natu- 
rally served to inspire the oppressed peoples of the East, awaken 
them and rouse them to the struggle, and thus make it possible 
to create a united front of oppressed nationalities, from Ireland to 
India. 

These are the factors which, in the second stage of development 
of national oppression, resulted in the fact that bourgeois society, 
far from solving the national problem, far from bringing peace to 
the peoples, has fanned the spark of national struggle into the 
flames of a struggle of the oppressed peoples, colonies, and semi- 
colonies against world imperialism. 

Obviously, the only regime capable of solving the national prob- 
lem, that is, of creating conditions which make possible the peace- 



102 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

ful coexistence and fraternal collaboration of various peoples and 
tribes, is the regime of the Soviet government, the regime of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat. 

It need hardly be shown that under the rule of capital, private 
property in the means of production, and the existence of classes, 
the equality of nations cannot be secured; that as long as the 
power of capital exists, as long as the struggle proceeds for pos- 
session of the means of production, there can be no equality of 
nationalities, just as there can be no collaboration between the 
toiling masses of the nations. History shows that the only way to 
abolish national inequality, the only way to establish a regime of 
fraternal collaboration among the toiling masses of the oppressed 
and unoppressed peoples, is to abolish capitalism and to establish 
a Soviet system. 

Further, history has shown that when individual peoples suc- 
ceed in emancipating themselves both from their own national 
bourgeoisie and from the “foreign” bourgeoisie, that is to say, 
when they establish a Soviet system, they cannot, as long as im- 
perialism prevails, carry on a separate existence and successfully 
maintain themselves without the economic and military support 
of neighboring Soviet republics. The example of Hungary elo- 
quently proves that, failing a political union of Soviet republics 
and their consolidation into a united military and economic force, 
it is impossible to withstand the united forces of world imperialism 
on either the military or the economic front. 

A federation of Soviet republics is that desired form of political 
union, of which the R.S.F.SR. is a living embodiment. 

These, comrades, are the premises of which I desired to speak 
here, first, in order then to prove that it is essential for our party 
to take definite steps in order to solve the national problem within 
the framework of the R.SJF.S.R. 

Although under the Soviet regime in Russia and in the republics 
associated with Russia we no longer have ruling nationalities or 
subject nationalities, mother country or colonies, exploited or ex- 
ploiters, nevertheless the national problem still exists in Russia. 



REPORT ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS IO3 

The crux of the national problem in the R.S.F.SR. lies in the 
obligation to put an end to that backwardness (economic, political, 
and cultural) of the nationalities which we have inherited from 
the past and to afford the backward peoples the opportunity of 
catching up with Central Russia politically, culturally, and eco- 
nomically. Under the old regime, the tsarist government did not 
strive, and could not strive, to develop the political life of the 
Ukraine, Azerbaidjan, Turkestan, and the other border regions; 
it resisted the development of political life in the border regions, 
just as it resisted their cultural development, and endeavored to 
assimilate the native populations forcibly. Furthermore, the old 
government, the landlords and the capitalists, have left us as a 
heritage such browbeaten peoples as the Kirghiz, the Chechens 
and the Ossets, whose lands served as an object of colonization by 
the Cossacks and kulak elements of Russia. These peoples were 
doomed to incredible suffering and to extinction. Moreover, the 
position of the Great-Russian nation, which was the dominant 
nation, has left its traces even on the Russian Communists, who 
are unable, or unwilling, to establish closer contact with the toil- 
ing native masses, to comprehend their needs and to help them 
emerge from their backward and uncivilized state. I am referring 
to those not very numerous groups of Russian Communists who, 
ignoring in their work the peculiarities of social life and culture in 
the border regions, at times tend towards Russian Great-Power 
chauvinism. Nor has the position of the non-Russian nationalities, 
which have suffered national oppression, failed to leave its traces 
on the native Communists, who are at times unable to distinguish 
the class interests of *the toiling masses of their people from the 
so-called “national” interests. I am referring to the deviation to- 
wards local, native nationalism which is at times to be observed in 
the ranks of the native Communists and which in the East ex- 
presses itself in Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkism. Finally, we must 
save the Kirghiz and Bashkirs and certain of the Gortsi tribes 
from extinction and provide them with necessary land at the 
expense of the kulak colonizers. 



104 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Having described the immediate tasks of the party, I should like 
to pass to the general task, the task of adapting our Communist 
policy in the border regions to those specific conditions of eco- 
nomic life which are to be found chiefly in the East. 

The fact of the matter is that a number of peoples, mainly 
Turkic peoples — about thirty million in all — have not passed, 
have not had time to pass, through the period of industrial capi- 
talism, and consequently have no industrial proletariat, or prac- 
tically no industrial proletariat, and as a result will have to pass 
from primitive forms of economy to the stage of Soviet economy 
without passing through the stage of industrial capitalism. In 
order to effect this difficult but by no means impossible operation, 
we must take into account all the peculiarities of economic life 
and even the history, social life, and culture of these peoples. To 
transplant to the territories of these peoples the measures which 
were effective and important here, in the center of Russia, would 
be absurd and dangerous. It is clear that, when putting the eco- 
nomic policy of the R.SF.S.R. into practice, we must unfailingly 
take into account all the peculiarities of economic life, class struc- 
ture, and historical past which mark the border regions. I do not 
stop to mention the elimination of such incongruities as, for in- 
stance, the demand made by the People’s Commissariat of Food, 
in connection with the food quotas, for the delivery of pigs in 
Kirghizia, where the Mohammedan population have never pos- 
sessed pigs. This example shows how unwilling people are to 
reckon with the peculiarities of customs which strike the eye of 
any traveler. 

I have just been handed a note in which a reply to Comrade 
Chicherin’s articles is requested. I consider that these articles of 
Chicherin, which I have read carefully, are nothing but literature. 
They contain four errors, or misconceptions. First, Comrade 
Chicherin is inclined to deny the existence of contradictions be- 
tween the imperialist states, to exaggerate the international una- 
nimity of the imperialists and to overlook and underrate the in- 
ternal contradictions between the imperialist groups and states 



REPORT ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS IO5 

(France, America, Great Britain, Japan, and so forth), contradic- 
tions which do exist and give rise to war. He has exaggerated the 
factor of unanimity of the imperialist rulers and has minimized the 
force of the contradictions that exist within this trust. Yet these con- 
tradictions do exist, and it is on them that the activities of the 
People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs are based. Comrade 
Chicherin makes a second mistake. He underestimates the contra- 
dictions which exist between the dominant Great Powers and the 
newly formed national states (Czechoslovakia, Poland, Finland, 
and others) which are in a position of financial and military subjec- 
tion to the Great Powers. Comrade Chicherin has entirely over- 
looked the fact that, in spite of the subjection of these national states 
to the Great Powers, or, more truly, because of this subjection, there 
are contradictions between these Great Powers and these states, 
such as were revealed, for example, in the negotiations with Po- 
land, Esthonia, and so forth. The whole purpose of the existence 
of the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs is to take account 
of these contradictions, to use them as a basis and to maneuver 
within these contradictions. Comrade Chicherin underrates this 
factor in a most astonishing way. 

Comrade Chicherin’s third mistake is that he speaks too much 
of national self-determination, which has in effect become an 
empty slogan easily adaptable to the use of the imperialists. Com- 
rade Chicherin has strangely forgotten that we discarded this 
slogan two years ago. Our program no longer contains this slogan. 
Our program speaks not of national self-determination — an abso- 
lutely vague slogan — but of a better minted and more clearly de- 
fined slogan — the right of nations to political secession. These are 
two different things. Strangely enough, Comrade Chicherin in his 
articles does not take this fact into account, and as a result all his 
objections to a slogan which has become a vague slogan are sheer 
misfires. For neither in my theses nor in the program of the party 
is there a single word about “self-determination.” What they speak 
of is the right of peoples to political secession. But for us at the 
present moment, when the movement for emancipation has flared 



106 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

up in the colonies, this slogan is a revolutionary slogan. Inasmuch 
as the Soviet states join in federation voluntarily, the right to 
secession remains unavailed of because the peoples that form the 
R.SJF.S.R. have themselves so willed. And inasmuch as we are 
concerned with colonies which are in the clutches of Great Britain, 
France, America, and Japan, inasmuch as we are concerned with 
such subject countries as Arabia, Mesopotamia, Turkey, Hin- 
dustan, countries which are colonies of the Entente, the slogan of 
the right of peoples to secession is a revolutionary slogan, and to 
abandon it would be playing into the hands of the Entente. The 
fourth basis for misconception is that Comrade Chicherin s articles 
contain no practical suggestions. It is easy, of course, to write 
articles; but when you entitle them “Against the Theses of Com- 
rade Stalin,” you must put forward something worthy of serious 
attention, some practical counter-proposals at least. Yet I have 
not found a single practical proposal in his articles worthy of 
attention. 

I conclude, comrades. We have arrived at the following conclu- 
sions. Not only has bourgeois society proved incapable of solving 
the national problem, but in its attempts to “solve” it has inflated 
it and turned the national problem into a colonial problem and 
has created against itself a new front stretching from Ireland to 
Hindustan. The only state capable of tackling and solving the 
national problem is a state based on collective ownership of the 
means and implements of production — a Soviet state. In the Soviet 
federal state there are no longer oppressed nationalities or ruling 
nationalities; national oppression is abolished. But in view of the 
virtual inequality (cultural, economic and political), inherited 
from the old bourgeois system, between the more civilized and the 
less ci viliz ed nationalities, the national problem assumes a form 
which demands the adoption of measures designed to foster the 
economic political, and cultural progress of the toiling masses of 
the backward nationalities and to give them the opportunity of 
catching up with the more advanced Central — proletarian — Rus- 
sia. From this follow the practical proposals that constitute the 



REPORT ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS IO7 

third section o£ the theses on the national problem I have sub- 
mitted. 


REPLY TO THE DISCUSSION 

In the discussion on the national problem, the most significant 
feature of the present congress is that we have now passed from 
declarations on the national problem, via the administrative re- 
division of Russia, to a practical presentation of the problem. At 
the beginning of the October Revolution we confined ourselves 
to a declaration of the right of peoples to secede. In 1918 and 1920 
our work was conducted along the lines of an administrative re- 
division of Russia according to nationality, with the object of 
establishing closer ties between the toiling masses of the backward 
peoples and the proletariat of Russia. And now, at this congress, 
we are placing the problem on a purely practical footing and ask- 
ing what must be the policy of the party towards the toiling 
masses and the petty-bourgeois elements within the autonomous 
regions and independent republics associated with Russia. I was 
therefore astonished by the statement made by Comrade Zatonsky 
that the theses submitted to you bear an abstract character. I have 
here in my hands his own theses, which for some reason or other 
he did not submit to the attention of the congress, and in which 
I have been unable to find a single proposal of a practical nature — 
literally not a single one, with the exception, perhaps, of the pro- 
posal that the name “R.SJF.S JR..” be replaced by the term “East- 
European,” and the word “Rossis\oye” by the word “Russian” 
or “Great-Russian.” I have found no other practical proposals in 
these theses. 

I now pass to the next question. I must say that I expected much 
more from the delegates who spoke. There are twenty-two border 
regions in Russia: some of these regions have undergone consider- 
able industrial development and industrially differ very little from 
Russia; others have not passed through the phase of capitalism 
and differ radically from Central Russia; while still others are 
completely downtrodden. To cover in the theses the heterogeneous 



IC>8 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

nature of these border regions in all its concreteness was impossible. 
One cannot demand that theses which concern the party as a 
whole should bear only a Turkestanian character, or only an 
Azerbaijanian or Ukrainian character. It is necessary to pick out 
and embody in the theses the features common to and character- 
istic of all the border regions and to abstract oneself from particu- 
lars. Man has not discovered any other way of drawing up theses. 
The non-Great-Russian nationalities must be ranged into several 
groups; this was done in the theses. The non-Russian nationalities 
number about 65,000,000 people. The feature common to all the 
non-Russian nationalities is that they are behind Central Russia 
in their development as states. Our duty must be to make every 
effort to help these nationalities— their proletarian and toiling ele- 
ments — develop their own Soviet state life in their own tongue. 
This common feature is dealt with in the theses in the section on 
practical proposals. Further, if we proceed to give a more con- 
crete definition to the peculiar features of the border regions, we 
must single out of the total of 65,000,000 non-Russian people the 
30,000,000 or so members of the Turkic population who have not 
passed through capitalism. 

Co mr ade Mikoyan is wrong when he says that in certain re- 
spects Azerbaidjan is superior to the Russian provinces. He is 
apparendy identifying Baku with Azerbaidjan. Baku did not 
spring out of the depths of Azerbaidjan but was built from above, 
by the efforts of Nobel, Rothschild, Wischau, and others. As to 
Azerbaidjan itself, it is a country with the most backward, patri- 
archal-feudal relations. I therefore rank Azerbaidjan as a whole 
with the group of border regions which have not passed through 
capitalism and in relation to which specific methods will have to 
be applied in order to bring these border regions into the channel 
of Soviet economy. This is dealt with in the theses. There is also 
a third group, embracing not more than 8,000,0000 or 10,000,000 
people, principally pastoral tribes, in which tribal forms of life 
are still tenacious and which have not yet taken to agriculture. 
These chiefly consist of the Kirghiz, the population of the North- 



REPORT ON IMMEDIATE PARTY TASKS I Op 

era part of Turkestan, the Bashkirs, the Chechens, the Ossets and 
the Ingushes. As regards this group of nationalities, it is first es- 
sential that we provide them with the necessary land. The Kirghiz 
did not get the floor here, the discussion was closed. They would 
have said more of the torments suffered by mountain Bashkiria, 
Kirghizia and by the Gortsi, who are dying out owing to lack of 
land. 

But what Safarov said here In this connection concerns only a 
group of 8,000,000 to 10,000,000 of the population. It would there- 
fore be inept to extend the practical proposals made by Comrade 
Safarov to all the border regions, for these amendments have no 
significance whatever for the remaining non-Russian nationalities 
— and they amount to about 55,000,000. That is why, while not 
objecting to the concrete amendments, additions, and improve- 
ments to individual clauses proposed by Safarov in regard to 
certain groups of nationalities, I must say that these amendments 
should not be made universal. Furthermore, I must make a re- 
mark regarding one of Comrade Safarov’s amendments. He has 
allowed the phrase “national cultural self-determination” to creep 
into one of his amendments. This amendment contains the fol- 
lowing: 

Before the October Revolution the colonial and semi-colonial peo- 
ples of the Eastern border regions of Russia were deprived by 
imperialist policy of all possibility of partaking in the cultural 
achievements of capitalist civilization by means of their own na- 
tional cultural self-determination, education in their own lan- 
guage. . . . 

I must say that I am unable to accept this amendment, because 
it smacks of Bundism. National cultural self-determination is a 
Bundist formula. We have long ago abandoned the nebulous slo- 
gans of self-determination — there is no need to revive them. Fur- 
thermore, this whole phrase is a most unnatural concatenation of 
words. 

I have here a note alleging that we Communists are cultivating 



IIO MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 


the White-Russian nationality artificially. This is not true, because 
there Is a White-Russian nation, which has its own language dis- 
tinct from Russian, and it Is therefore possible to raise the cultural 
level of the White-Russian people only in its native language. Such 
talk was heard some five years ago about the Ukraine and the 
Ukrainian nation. And only quite recently it was asserted that the 
Ukrainian Republic and the Ukrainian nationality are an inven- 
tion of the Germans. But It is obvious that the Ukrainian nation 
exists, and It is the duty of Communists to develop its culture. 
We must not go counter to history. It is obvious that, although in 
the towns of the Ukraine Russian elements still predominate, in 
the course of time these towns will inevitably become Ukrainian- 
ized. About forty years ago Riga was a German town; but since 
towns grow by influx from the countryside, and the countryside is 
the guardian of nationality, Riga is now a purely Lettish town. 
About fifty years ago all the towns of Hungary bore a German 
character; now they are Magyarized. The same will be true of 
White Russia, In the towns of which non-White-Russians still 
predominate. 

In concluding the reply to the discussion, I propose that the 
congress elect a committee, representative of the regions, for the 
purpose of giving more concrete form to those practical proposals 
in the theses which interest all our border regions. 

Delivered at the Tenth Congress of the Russian Com- 
munist Party, March io, 1921. 



New Features of the National Question 


The presentation of the national question given by the Com- 
munists essentially differs from the presentation favored by the 
leaders of the Second and the Two-and-a-Half International * 
and by all and every kind of “Socialist / 9 “Social-Democratic / 9 
Menshevik, Socialist-Revolutionary and other party. 

It is particularly important to stress four principal factors as 
being the most characteristic and distinguishing features of the 
new presentation of the national question, features which draw 
a line between the old and the new conceptions of the national 
question. 

The first factor is that the national question, as a part, has be- 
come merged with the general question of the emancipation of 
the colonies, as the whole. In the era of the Second International 
it was usual to confine the national question to a narrow circle of 
questions relating exclusively to the “civilized nations.” The Irish, 
the Czechs, the Poles, the Finns, the Serbs, the Armenians, the 
Jews, and a few other European nationalities — such was the circle 
of non-sovereign peoples whose fates interested the Second Inter- 
national. The tens and hundreds of millions of the Asiatic and 
African peoples suffering from national oppression in its crudest 
and most brutal form did not as a rule enter the field of vision of 
the “Socialists.” The latter did not venture to place the white 
peoples and colored peoples, the “uncultured” Negroes and the 
“civilized” Irish, the “backward” Indians and the “enlightened” 
Poles on one and the same footing. It was tacitly assumed that 
although it might be necessary to strive for the emancipation of 

* The international association of centrist Socialist parties formed in 
Vienna in 1921. — Ed. 


hi 



1 12 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

the European non-sovereign nationalities, it was entirely un- 
becoming for “decent Socialists” to speak seriously of the 
emancipation of the colonies, which were “necessary” for the 
“preservation” of “civilization.” These apologies for Socialists 
did not even suspect that the abolition of national oppression in 
Europe is inconceivable without the emancipation of the colonial 
peoples of Asia and Africa from the oppression of imperialism, 
and that the former is organically bound up with the latter. It 
was the Communists who first revealed the connection between 
the national question and the question of the colonies, who proved 
it theoretically and made it the basis of their practical revolution- 
ary work. This broke down the wall between the white peoples 
and the colored peoples, between the “civilized” and “uncivilized” 
slaves of imperialism. This circumstance considerably facilitated 
the co-ordination of the struggle of the backward colonies with 
the struggle of the advanced proletariat against the common 
enemy, imperialism. 

The second factor is that the vague slogan of the right of na- 
tions to self-determination has been replaced by the clear revo- 
lutionary slogan of the right of nations and colonies to political 
secession and the formation of independent states. When they 
spoke of the right of self-determination, the moving spirits of the 
Second International as a rule never even hinted at the right to 
political secession — the right of self-determination was at best in- 
terpreted to mean the right to autonomy in general. The “experts” 
on the national question, Springer and Bauer, even went so far as 
to convert the right of self-determination into the right of the 
oppressed nations of Europe to cultural autonomy, that is, the 
right to have their own cultural institutions with all the political 
(and economic) power remaining in the hands of the dominant 
nation. In other words, the right of non-sovereign nations to self- 
determination was transformed into the privilege of the dominant 
nations to wield political power, and the question of political 
secession was excluded. 



NEW FEATURES OF THE NATIONAL QUESTION II3 

The ideological leader o£ the Second International, Kantsky, 
associated himself in the main with this essentially imperialist 
interpretation of self-determination as given by Springer and 
Bauer. It is not surprising that the imperialists, realizing how con- 
venient for them this peculiarity of the slogan of self-determination 
is, proclaimed this slogan their own. As we know, the imperialist 
war, the aim of which was to enslave peoples, was fought under 
the flag of self-determination. Thus the vague slogan of self- 
determination was transformed from an instrument of emancipa- 
tion of nations and of equality of nations into an instrument for 
taming nations, an instrument for keeping nations in subjection 
to imperialism. The course of events in recent years all over the 
world, the logic of revolution in Europe, and, finally, the growth 
of the movement for emancipation in the colonies demanded that 
this slogan, which had become a reactionary slogan, should be cast 
aside and replaced by another slogan, a revolutionary slogan, 
which would serve to dissipate the atmosphere of mistrust enter- 
tained by the toiling masses of the non-sovereign nations towards 
the proletarians of the dominant nations and to clear the way for 
the equality of nations and for the unity of the toilers of all na- 
tions. Such a slogan is the slogan issued by the Communists 
demanding the right of non-sovereign nations and colonies to 
political secession. The advantages of this slogan are that: 

1. It removes all grounds of suspicion that the toilers of one 
nation entertain annexatory ambitions towards the toilers of an- 
other nation, and therefore creates a basis for mutual confidence 
and voluntary amalgamation; and 

2. It tears the mask from the imperialists, who, while menda- 
ciously prating of self-determination, are endeavoring to keep the 
non-sovereign peoples and colonies in subjection and to retain 
them within their imperialist state, and thereby intensifies the 
struggle of these peoples and colonies for emancipation from im- 
perialism. 

It need hardly be shown that the Russian workers could not have 



1 14 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

gained the sympathies of their comrades of other nationalities in 
the West and the East if, having assumed power, they had not 
proclaimed the right of peoples to political secession, if they had 
not demonstrated in practice their readiness to give effect to this 
inalienable right of peoples, if they had not renounced their 
“rights;’ let us say, to Finland (1917), if they had not withdrawn 
the troops from Northern Persia (1917), if they had not re- 
nounced all claims to certain parts of Mongolia and China, and 
so on and so forth. 

It is equally unquestionable that the fact that the policy of the 
imperialists, skillfully concealed under the flag of self-determina- 
tion, has recently been meeting with defeat after defeat in the 
East is due among other reasons to its having there encountered a 
growing movement for emancipation, which has arisen as a result 
of agitation in the spirit of the demand for the right of peoples to 
political secession. This is not understood by the heroes of the 
Second and the Two-and-a-Half International, who are zealously 
abusing the Baku “Council of Action and Propaganda” for certain 
immaterial lapses committed by it; but it will be understood by 
anyone who takes the trouble to acquaint himself with the activi- 
ties of this Council during the year it has been in existence and 
with the movement for emancipation of the Asiatic and African 
colonies during the last two or three years. 

The third factor is the disclosure of the connection, the organic 
connection, between the national and colonial question and the 
question of the power of capital, the overthrow of capitalism, and 
the dictatorship of the proletariat. In the period of the Second 
International the national question, narrowed to the extreme in its 
scope, was usually treated as an isolated question, unrelated to 
the future proletarian revolution. It was tacitly assumed that the 
national question would be settled “naturally,” before the pro- 
letarian revolution, by means of a series of reforms within the 
framework of capitalism; that the proletarian revolution could 
be accomplished without a radical solution of the national prob- 
lem, and that, vice versa, the national problem could be solved 



NEW FEATURES OF THE NATIONAL QUESTION II5 

without the overthrow of the power of capital, without and prior 
to the victory of the proletarian revolution. This essentially Im- 
perialist view runs like a crimson thread through the works of 
Springer and Bauer on the national question. But the last decade 
has exposed the utter falsity and rottenness of this conception of 
the national question. The Imperialist war has shown, and the 
revolutionary experience of recent years has again confirmed: 

1. That the national and colonial questions are inseparable 
from the question of emancipation from the power of capital; 

2. That imperialism (the highest form of capitalism) cannot 
exist without the political and economic enslavement of non- 
sovereign nations and colonies; 

3. That the non-sovereign nations and colonies cannot be 
emancipated without the overthrow of the power of capital; and 

4. That the victory of the proletariat cannot be a lasting one 
unless the non-sovereign nations and colonies are emancipated 
from the yoke of imperialism. 

If Europe and America may be called the front, the scene of the 
main engagements between socialism and imperialism, the non- 
sovereign nations and the colonies, with their raw materials, fuel, 
food and vast store of human material, should be regarded as the 
rear, the reserve of imperialism. In order to win a war one must 
not only triumph at the front but also revolutionize the enemy’s 
rear, his reserves. Hence the victory of the world proletarian revo- 
lution may be regarded as assured only if the proletariat is able 
to combine its own revolutionary struggle with the movement for 
emancipation of the toiling masses of the non-sovereign nations 
and the colonies against the power of the imperialists and for a 
dictatorship of the proletariat. This “trifle” was overlooked by the 
moving spirits of the Second and the Two-and-a-Half Interna- 
tional when they divorced the national and colonial question 
from the question of power in the period of growing proletarian 
revolution in the West. 

The fourth factor is that a new element has been introduced 
into the national question— the element of real (and not merely 



Il6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

juridical) equalization of nations (helping and encouraging the 
backward nations to raise themselves to the cultural and economic 
level of the more advanced nations), as one of the conditions 
necessary for securing fraternal co-operation between the toiling 
masses of the various nationalities. In the period of the Second 
International they usually confined themselves to proclaiming 
‘"national equality”; at best they did not go beyond demanding 
the realization of such equality. But national equality, in itself a 
very important political acquisition, runs the risk of remaining 
merely an empty phrase if adequate resources and opportunities 
for exercising this very important right do not exist. There can be 
no question that the toiling masses of the backward peoples are 
not in a position to exercise the right of “national equality” 
granted them to the degree that it can be exercised by the toiling 
masses of advanced nationalities. The actual inequality of nations 
(cultural and economic), which is a heritage of the past and 
which cannot be abolished in one or two years, makes its influence 
felt. This circumstance is particularly perceptible in Russia, where 
a number of nationalities have never passed through capitalism, 
and some have not even entered the phase of capitalism, and have 
no proletariat, or practically no proletariat, of their own; 'where, 
in spite of the fact that complete national equality has already 
been established, the toiling masses of these nationalities are not 
in a position to make adequate use of the rights they have won in 
view of their cultural and economic backwardness. 

This Inequality will make itself felt still more “on the morrow” 
of the victory of the proletariat in the West, when numerous 
backward colonies and semi-colonies, marked by the most varied 
levels of development, will inevitably appear on the scene. That 
is why it is essential that the triumphant proletariat of the ad- 
vanced countries should render aid, real and prolonged aid, to the 
toiling masses of the backward nationalities in their cultural and 
economic development; that it should help them to rise to a higher 
stage of development and to catch up with the more advanced 
nationalities. Unless such aid is forthcoming it will be impossible 



NEW FEATURES OF THE NATIONAL QUESTION IIJ 

to bring about the peaceful co-existence and fraternal collabora- 
tion of the toilers of the various nations and peoples within a 
single world economic system that are so essential for the final 
triumph of socialism. 

But from this it follows that we cannot content ourselves with 
“national equality” and that “national equality” must be extended 
by means of measures for securing the real equality of nationali- 
ties, and that we must proceed to work out and put into effect 
practical measures in relation to : 

1. The study of the economic conditions, social life, and culture 
of the backward nations and peoples; 

2. The development of their culture; 

3. Their political education; 

4. Their gradual and painless incorporation into the higher 
forms of economic life; and 

5. The organization of economic co-operation between the 
toilers of the backward and the advanced nationalities. 

Such are the principal factors which distinguish the new 
formulation of the national question as given by the Communists. 


fravda. No. 98, May 8, 1921. 



The Amalgamation of the Soviet Republics 


Several days ago, before this congress began, the Presidium of 
the All-Russian Central Executive Committee received a number 
of decisions taken by congresses of Soviets of the Transcaucasian 
Republics, the Ukraine, and White Russia, on the desirability and 
necessity of amalgamating these republics into a single confederate 
state. The Presidium of the All-Russian Central Executive Com- 
mittee has discussed this question and declares such an amalgama- 
tion to be timely. The question of amalgamating the republics 
therefore is on the agenda of this congress. 

The campaign for the amalgamation of the Soviet socialist re- 
publics began some three or four months ago. The initiative was 
taken by the Azerbaijanian, Armenian and Georgian Republics, 
which were later joined by the Ukrainian and White-Russian Re- 
publics. The idea of the campaign is that the old contractual rela- 
tions — the relations established by the convention between the 
R.SJF.S.R. and the other Soviet republics— have outlived them- 
selves and are no longer adequate. The idea of the campaign is 
that it has become imperative that the old contractual relations 
should be replaced by relations based on closer union — relations 
which imply the creation of a single confederate state with cor- 
responding confederate executive and legislative organs, with a 
Central Executive Committee and a Council of People’s Commis- 
sars of the Union. In brief, what has hitherto been decided epi- 
sodically, within the framework of contractual relations, it is now, 
in the course of the campaign, proposed to establish as something 
permanent. 

What are the reasons impelling the republics towards amalga- 

ij8 



THE AMALGAMATION OF THE SOVIET REPUBLICS II9 

mation; what are the circumstances determining the necessity for 
amalgamation ? 

There are three groups of circumstances which render the amal- 
gamation of the Soviet republics into a single confederate state 
inevitable. 

The first group of circumstances consists of facts relating to the 
internal economic situation. First, there is the meager ness of the 
economic resources remaining at the disposal of the republics after 
seven years of war, which obliges us to combine these meager 
resources so as to employ them more rationally and to develop the 
main branches of production, those which form the backbone of 
Soviet power in each republic. Second, there is the historically 
determined natural division of labor, the economic division of 
labor, between the various regions and republics of our federa- 
tion. For instance, the North supplies the South and East with 
textiles, the South and East supply the North with cotton, fuel, 
and so forth. The division of labor thus established between the 
regions cannot be eliminated by a mere stroke of the pen: it has 
been created historically by the whole course of economic develop- 
ment of the federation. And this division of labor, which renders 
the full development of individual regions impossible as long as 
the republics lead separate existences, is compelling our republics 
to knit themselves into a single economic unit. Thirdly, there is 
the fact that the principal means of communication in the federa- 
tion, which are the nerve and backbone of any possible union, 
constitute a single system. It goes without saying that the means of 
communication cannot be left in a divided state in the hands of 
and subordinated to the interests of the individual republics; for 
that would convert the main nerve of economic life — transport — 
into a conglomeration of separate parts utilized without regard 
to plan. This circumstance also induces the republics to favor 
amalgamation into a single state. 'Finally, there is the meagerness 
of our financial resources. Comrades, it must be bluntly stated that 
our financial position now, in the sixth year of existence of the 
Soviet government, has far less opportunities for large-scale devel- 



120 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

opment than, for instance, under the old regime, which had vodka, 
as we will not have, that yielded 500,000,000 rubles per annum, 
and which was assured of foreign credits to the value of several 
hundred million rubles, which we also do not have. All this goes 
to prove that we shall be unable with such meager opportunities 
for financial development to solve the fundamental and urgent 
problems confronting the financial systems of our republics unless 
we rally our forces and unless we combine the financial strength 
of the various republics into a single whole. 

Such is the first group of circumstances impelling our republics 
towards amalgamation. 

The second group of circumstances rendering the amalgamation 
of the republics essential consists of facts relating to our interna- 
tional position. I am referring to our military position. I am re- 
ferring to our relations with foreign capital through the Com- 
missariat of Foreign Trade. I am referring, finally, to our diplo- 
matic relations with the bourgeois states. It should be remembered, 
comrades, that in spite of the fact that our republics have happily 
emerged from the condition of civil war, the danger of attack from 
without is far from eliminated. This danger demands that our 
military front should be absolutely united, that our army should 
be an absolutely united army, particularly now that we have begun 
to undertake, not moral disarmament, of course, but a real, material 
reduction of armaments. Now that we have reduced our army to 
600,000 men, it is particularly essential to have a single and un- 
breakable military front capable of guaranteeing the republic 
against external danger. Furthermore, apart from the military- 
danger, there is a danger of the economic isolation of our federa- 
tion. You know that after Genoa and the Hague,* and after 
Urquhart f although the economic boycott of our republic failed, 
nevertheless we do not observe any large inflow of capital for the 

* International economic conferences in 1922 of the great powers, in- 
cluding Soviet Russia. — Ed. 

+ British industrialist who sought concessions in Soviet Russia in 1922. 
—Ed. 



THE AMALGAMATION OF THE SOVIET REPUBLICS 12 1 

needs o£ our economy. There Is a danger that our republics may 
become economically Isolated. This new form of intervention, 
which is no less dangerous than military intervention, can be dim' 
mated only by the creation of a united economic front of our Soviet 
republics In face of the capitalist encirclement. Finally, there is our 
diplomatic situation. You have all been witnesses of how recently, 
on the eve of the Lausanne Conference,* the Entente states made 
every effort to isolate our federation. Diplomatically, they did not 
succeed. The organized diplomatic boycott of our federation was 
broken. The Entente was forced to reckon with our federation and 
to a certain extent to beat a retreat. 

There are no grounds for assuming that such and similar cases 
of diplomatic isolation of our federation will not be repeated. Hence 
the necessity for a united front along diplomatic lines also. 

Such is the second group of circumstances impelling the Soviet 
socialist republics towards amalgamation. 

Both the first and the second groups of circumstances have oper- 
ated throughout the period of the existence of the Soviet govern- 
ment and operate to this day. Unquestionably, both our economic 
needs, of which I have just spoken, and our military and diplo- 
matic needs in the field of foreign policy were felt before. But these 
circumstances assume insistent force only now, when the Civil War 
is ended, when the republics have secured the first opportunity of 
setting about their economic development and when they have for 
the first time fully realized the meagerness of their economic re- 
sources and the necessity of uniting both along internal, economic 
lines and along external lines. That is why now, in the sixth year 
of existence of the Soviet government, the question of the amalga- 
mation of the independent Soviet socialist republics has become 
urgent. 

Finally, there is a third group of facts which also call for amal- 
gamation and which are associated with the character of the struc- 
ture of the Soviet power and with the class nature of the Soviet 

* Held in November, 1922, to conclude peace between Greece and Turkey. 
The attempt to keep the Soviet delegation out of the conference failed.— Ed. 



122 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

power. The Soviet power Is so constructed that, being International 
by Its Intrinsic nature, it systematically fosters the Idea of unity 
among the masses and Impels them towards amalgamation. 

While capital, private property, and exploitation disunite peoples, 
splitting them into hostile camps, an example of which is furnished 
by Great Britain, France, and even such small multi-national states 
as Poland and Yugoslavia, with their irreconcilable internal na- 
tional contradictions, which eat at the very foundations of these 
states— while, I say, there, in the West, where capitalist democracy 
prevails and where the states rest on private property, the very basis 
of the state fosters national enmity, conflicts, and struggle — here, in 
the realm of the Soviets, where the power is built not on capital, but 
on labor, where the power is built not on private property, but on 
collective property, where the power is built not on the exploita- 
tion of man by man, but on hostility to such exploitation, here, on 
the contrary, the very nature of the government power fosters a 
natural striving on the part of the toiling masses towards unity in 
a single socialist family. Is it not a striking fact that whereas there, 
in the West, in the world of bourgeois democracy, we are witness- 
ing the gradual decline and disintegration of the multi-national 
states into their component parts (as in the case of Great Britain, 
which will settle matters, I know not how, with India, Egypt, and 
Ireland, or, as in the case of Poland, which will settle matters, I also 
know not how, with her White-Russians, Ukrainians, Germans, 
and Jews), here, in our federation, embracing no less than thirty na- 
tionalities, we are, on the contrary, witnessing a process of consoli- 
dation of political ties between the Independent republics, a process 
which is leading to an ever closer union of independent national- 
ities Into a single independent state. Here you have two types of 
political union, of which one type, the capitalist type, leads to the 
disintegration of the state into its component parts, while the second 
type, the Soviet type, on the contrary, leads to a gradual but stable 
amalgamation of formerly independent nationalities into a single 
independent state. 



THE AMALGAMATION OF THE SOVIET REPUBLICS 1 23 

Such Is the third group of circumstances impelling the various 
republics towards amalgamation. 

What form should be given to the amalgamation of the republics ? 
The basis of amalgamation is set forth In the resolutions received 
by the Presidium of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee 
from the Soviet republics of the Ukraine, White Russia, and Trans- 


caucasia. 

The union will be made up of four republics: the Russian Soviet 
Federative Socialist Republic as an integral federal unit, the Trans- 
caucasian Republic, also as an integral federal unit, the Ukraine, 
and White Russia. Two independent Soviet republics, Kharezm 
and Bokhara, which are not socialist republics, but people’s Soviet 
republics, for the time being remain outside the union for the sole 
and exclusive reason that these republics are not socialist. I do not 
doubt, comrades, and I hope that you also do not doubt, that these 
republics, as they internally develop towards socialism, will also 
come to form part of the confederate state which is now being con- 
stituted. 

It might seem more expedient that not the R.S.F.S.R., as an in- 
tegral federal unit, but the individual republics which make up the 
R.S.F.S.R. should join the union of republics, for which purpose 
the R.SF.S.R. would presumably first have to be dissolved into its 


component parts. I think that this would be an irrational and in- 
expedient method and that it is precluded by the very course the 
campaign is taking. First, this method would lead to the result 
that, parallel with the process making for the amalgamation of the 


republics, we should be having a process making for the decom- 
position of the already existing federal units. The effect of this 
process would be that the truly revolutionary process of the amal- 
gamation of the reDublics which has already begun would be turned 


topsy-turvy. 

Secondly, this false method would result in a state of affairs in 
which, in addition to the eight autonomous republics, we should 
be obliged to separate from the R.S.F.S.R. a specifically Russian 
Central Executive Committee and Russian Council of People’s 


4 



124 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Commissars, which would lead to considerable organizational per- 
turbations. This is entirely unnecessary and harmful at the present 
time, and is not in the least demanded by either the internal or the 
external situation. That is why I consider that the participants in the 
amalgamation into the union must be the four republics: the 
R.S.P.S.R., the Transcaucasian Federation, the Ukraine, and 
White Russia. 

The treaty of union must be based on the following principles : 
Commissariats of Foreign Trade, Military and Naval Affairs, For- 
eign Affairs, Ways of Communication and Post and Telegraph 
shall be set up only within the Council of People’s Commissars of 
the Union. The People’s Commissariats of Finance, National 
Economy, Food, Labor, and Inspection shall continue within each 
of the contracting republics, but in such a way as to operate in ac- 
cordance with the instructions of the corresponding central Com- 
missariats of the Union. This is necessary in order that the forces 
of the toiling masses of the republics may come under the joint 
aegis of the Union center as regards food supply, the Supreme 
Council of National Economy, the People’s Commissariat of 
Finance, and the People’s Commissariat of Labor. Finally, the re- 
maining commissariats, the Commissariats of Home Affairs, Jus- 
tice, Education, Agriculture, and so on — there are six in all — which 
are directly connected with the life, customs, the specific forms of 
land regulation, the specific forms of legal procedure and the 
language and culture of the peoples forming the republics, must 
remain independent commissariats under the control of the Cen- 
tral Executive Committees and Councils of People’s Commissars 
of the contracting republics. This is essential in order to provide 
a real guarantee for the freedom of national development of the 
peoples forming the Soviet republics. 

Such, in my opinion, are the principles that must be made the 
foundation of the treaty shortly to be signed between our republics. 

Since the time the Soviet republics were formed the states of the 
world have split into two camps: the camp of socialism and the 
camp of capitalism. In the camp of capitalism we have imperialist 



THE AMALGAMATION OF THE SOVIET REPUBLICS I2J 

war, national enmity, oppression, colonial slavery, and chauvinism. 
In the camp of the Soviets, the camp of socialism, on the contrary, 
we have mutual confidence, national equality, and the peaceful 
coexistence and fraternal collaboration of peoples. Capitalist de- 
mocracy has been endeavoring for decades to solve national con- 
tradictions by combining the interests of the free development of 
nationalities with the system of exploitation. But so far it has not 
succeeded, and it will not succeed. On the contrary, the skein of 
national contradiction is becoming more and more entangled, 
threatening the end of capitalism. Here alone, in the world of the 
Soviets, in the camp of socialism, has it been possible to tear up the 
very roots of national oppression and to establish mutual confidence 
and fraternal collaboration between peoples. And only when the 
Soviets succeeded in this did it become possible to build up our 
federation and to defend it against the attack of the enemies, both 
internal and external. Five years ago the Soviet government suc- 
ceeded in laying a foundation for the peaceful coexistence and fra- 
ternal collaboration of peoples. Now, in deciding here on the 
desirability and necessity of amalgamation, we are about to erect 
on this foundation a new edifice by founding a new and mighty 
confederate power of the toilers. The will of the peoples of our 
republics, who recently assembled at their congresses and unani- 
mously resolved to form a Union of Republics, is incontestable 
proof of the fact that the cause of amalgamation is pursuing the 
right lines and that it is based on the great principle of volun- 
tary consent and equality of peoples. Let us hope, comrades, that by 
forming our confederate republic we shall be creating a reliable 
bulwark against international capitalism and that the new confed- 
erate state will be another decisive step towards the amalgamation 
of the toilers of the whole world into a single world socialist Soviet 
Republic. 


Report to the Tenth All-Russian Congress of Soviets, 
December 2 6, 1922. 



Theses on National Factors in the Development 
of the Party and the State 


I 

1. Even as early as the last century the development o£ capitalism 
betrayed a tendency to internationalize the means of production 
and exchange, to eliminate national aloofness, to bring peoples into 
closer economic relations, and gradually to merge vast territories 
into a single connected whole. The further development of capital- 
ism, the development of the world market, the perfection of the 
great rail and sea routes, the export of capital, and so on, still further 
accentuated this tendency and bound all kinds of peoples by the ties 
of international division of labor and universal interdependence. 
Inasmuch as this process was a reflection of a colossal development 
of productive forces, inasmuch as it helped to destroy national 
isolation and the contradicdon between the interests of the various 
peoples, it was and is a progressive process, for it is creating the 
material conditions for a future world socialist economic system. 

2. But this tendency developed in specific forms which were 
completely at variance with its intrinsic historical significance. The 
interdependence of peoples and the economic amalgamation of 
territories arose in the course of the development of capitalism not 
as a result of the collaboration of peoples enjoying equal status, but 
by means of the subjection of certain peoples by others, by means 
of the oppression and exploitation of less developed peoples by 
more developed peoples. Colonial plunder and annexations, na- 
tional oppression and inequality, imperialist violence and arbitrary 
rule, colonial slavery and national subjection, and, finally, the 
struggle among the “civilized” nations for mastery over the “un- 
civilized” peoples — such were the forms in which the process of 

126 



THESES ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE 12 7 

economic amalgamation o£ peoples took place. For this reason we 
find that, side by side with the tendency to amalgamation, there 
grew up a tendency to destroy the violent forms assumed by this 
amalgamation, a struggle for the emancipation of the oppressed 
colonies and dependent nationalities from the imperialist yoke. 
Inasmuch as the latter tendency implied a revolt of the oppressed 
masses against imperialist forms of amalgamation, inasmuch as it 
demanded the amalgamation of peoples on the basis of collabora- 
tion and voluntary union, it was and is a progressive tendency, for it 
is creating the psychological conditions for the future world socialist 
economic system. 

3. The conflict between these two principal tendencies, ex- 
pressed in forms that are natural to capitalism, fills the history of 
the multi-national bourgeois states during the last half-century. 
The fact that the contradiction between these tendencies is irrec- 
oncilable within the framework of capitalist development was the 
basic reason for the intrinsic insolvency and the organic instability 
of the bourgeois colonial states. Inevitable conflicts within such 
states and inevitable wars between such states; disintegration of 
the old colonial states and the formation of new ones; a new drive 
for colonies and again the disintegration of multi-national states, 
leading to a new rearrangement of the political map of the world- 
such are the results of this fundamental contradiction. The disin- 
tegration of the old Russia, of Austria-Hungary, and of Turkey, 
on the one hand, and the history of such colony-owning states as 
Great Britain and the old Germany, on the other; and, lastly, the 
“great” imperialist war and the growth of the revolutionary move- 
ment among the colonial and non-sovereign peoples — all these and 
similar facts clearly point to the instability and insolidity of the 
multi-national bourgeois states. 

Thus the irreconcilable contradiction between the process of 
economic amalgamation of the peoples and the imperialist methods 
of accomplishing this amalgamation was the cause of the inability, 
helplessness, and impotence of the bourgeoisie in finding a correct 
approach to the solution of the national problem. 



128 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

4. Our party took these circumstances into consideration when 
it made the basis of its policy in the national question the right 
of nations to self-determination;, the right of peoples to lead an 
independent political existence. From the first days of its existence, 
at its very first congress (in 1898), when the contradictions of 
capitalism in connection with the national question had not yet 
become fully and clearly defined, the party recognized this in- 
alienable right of nations. In subsequent years it steadfastly en- 
dorsed its national program in specific decisions and resolutions 
of its congresses and conferences down to the October Revolution. 
The imperialist war and the mighty revolutionary movement 
which arose in connection with it in the colonies only provided 
new corroboration of the correctness of the decisions adopted by 
the party on the national question. These decisions consist of 
(a) the vigorous repudiation of all and every form of compulsion 
in relation to the nationalities; (b) the recognition of the equal 
and sovereign right of the peoples to determine their own desti- 
nies; (c) the recognition of the thesis that a durable amalgama- 
tion of peoples can be accomplished only on a basis of collaboration 
and voluntary consent; (d) the proclamation of the truth that 
such an amalgamation is possible only as a result of the over- 
throw of the power of capital. 

Our party in its work never tired of advancing this program of 
national emancipation in opposition to both the frankly coercive 
policy of tsarism and the half-hearted, semi-imperialist policy of 
the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. Whereas the tsarist 
Russification policy created an abyss between tsarism and the na- 
tionalities of old Russia, and whereas the semi-imperialist policy 
of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries led the best ele- 
ments among these nationalities to desert Kerenskyism, the policy 
of emancipation pursued by our party won for it the sympathy 
and support of the broad masses of these nationalities in the strug- 
gle it waged against tsarism and the imperialist Russian bour- 
geoisie, There can be litde doubt that this sympathy and support 



THESES ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE 1 29 

was one of the decisive factors that determined the triumph of 
our party in the October Revolution. 

5 . The October Revolution confirmed and gave practical effect 
to the decisions of our party on the national question. By over- 
throwing the power of the landlords and capitalists, to whom na- 
tional oppression was chiefly due, and by putting the proletariat 
in power, the October Revolution at one blow smashed the fetters 
of national oppression, destroyed the old relations between peo- 
ples, removed the grounds of the old national enmity, cleared the 
way for the collaboration of peoples, and won for the Russian pro- 
letariat the confidence of its brothers of other nationalities, not 
only in Russia, but also in Europe and Asia. It need hardly be 
shown that had it not enjoyed this confidence the Russian pro- 
letariat could not have defeated Kolchak and Denikin, Yudenich, 
and Wrangel. On the other hand, there is no doubt that the op 1 
pressed nationalities could not have achieved their emancipation 
if the dictatorship of the proletariat had not been established in 
the center of Russia. National enmity and national conflicts are 
inevitable, unavoidable, as long as capital is in power, as long as 
the petty bourgeoisie, and in particular the peasantry, of the former 
“sovereign” nation, permeated as they are by nationalist prejudices, 
follow the capitalists; and, on the contrary, national peace and 
national freedom may be considered assured when the peasantry 
and the other petty-bourgeois strata follow the proletariat, that is, 
when the dictatorship of the proletariat is assured. Hence, the 
triumph of the Soviets and the establishment of the dictatorship of 
the proletariat constitute the basis and foundation on which the 
fraternal collaboration of peoples within a single confederate state 
can be built up. 

6 . But the results of the October Revolution are not confined to 
the elimination of national oppression and the creation of a basis 
for the amalgamation of peoples. In the course of its develop- 
ment, the October Revolution also evolved the forms of this 
amalgamation and laid down the main lines for the amalgamation 
of peoples into a single confederate state. In the first period of the 



I3O MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

revolution, when the toiling masses of the nationalities first came 
to feel that they were independent national units, while the 
threat of foreign intervention had not yet become a real danger, 
collaboration between the peoples did not yet assume a fully and 
strictly defined form. In the period of civil war and intervention, 
when the requirements of military defense in the national repub- 
lics assumed prime importance, while questions of economic con- 
struction had not yet been placed on the order of the day, 
collaboration took the form of a military alliance. Finally, in the 
post-war period, when the problems of the restoration of the 
productive forces destroyed by the war assumed prime impor- 
tance, the military alliance was supplemented by an economic 
alliance. The amalgamation of the national republics into the 
Union of Soviet Republics represents the concluding stage in the 
development of the forms of collaboration which have now as- 
sumed the character of a military, economic, and political amalga- 
mation of peoples into a single multi-national Soviet state. 

Thus in the Soviet state structure the proletariat has found the 
key to the national problem, has found the way to organize a dura- 
ble multi-national state on the basis of national equality and volun- 
tary consent. 

7. But the fact that the key has been found to the national 
problem does not yet mean that it has been solved fully and 
finally, that the solution has been exhaustively realized concretely 
and practically. In order to give proper effect to the national pro- 
gram advanced by the October Revolution, it is necessary to 
surmount obstacles which have been left to us as a heritage from 
the period of national oppression, obstacles that cannot be sur- 
mounted at a single blow and at short notice. 

This heritage consists, in the first place, in the survivals of 
Great-Power chauvinism, which is a reflection of the former 
privileged position of the Great-Russians. These survivals still 
persist in the minds of our Soviet officials, both central and local; 
they breed in our state institutions, central and local; they are 



THESES ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I3I 

receiving reinforcements in the shape of the “new” Smenove\h * 
Great-Russian chauvinist spirit, which the New Economic Policy 
tends to accentuate. In practice they find expression in an arro- 
gant, negligent, and soullessly bureaucratic attitude on the part 
of Russian Soviet officials towards the needs and requirements 
of the national republics. The multi-national Soviet state can be 
truly durable, and the collaboration of the peoples within it truly 
fraternal, only if these survivals are vigorously and irrevocably 
eradicated from the practice of our state institutions. Thus the 
first immediate task of our party is to wage determined warfare 
on the survivals of Great-Russian chauvinism. 

This heritage consists, secondly, in the actual — economic and 
cultural — inequality of the nationalities of the Union of Republics. 
The equality of legal status of the nations won by the October 
Revolution is a great achievement for the peoples, but it does not 
in itself solve the whole national problem. A number of republics 
and peoples which have not passed, or have hardly entered, the 
stage of capitalism, which have no proletariat, or hardly any pro- 
letariat, of their own, and which on this account are backward 
economically and culturally, are incapable of utilizing to the full 
the rights and opportunities offered them by national equality; 
they are incapable of achieving a higher level of development, and 
thus catching up with the more advanced nationalities, unless 
they receive real and prolonged assistance from outside. The 
causes of this actual inequality lie not only in the history of these 
peoples, but also in the policy pursued by tsarism and the Russian 
bourgeoisie, which aimed at converting the border regions into 
areas exclusively producing raw materials and exploited by the 
industrially developed central districts. To remove this inequality 
in a short space of time, to eliminate this heritage in a year or 
two, is impossible. The Tenth Congress of our party has already 
pointed out that “the elimination of actual national inequality is 
a lengthy process involving a stubborn and persistent struggle 

* Literally, “changing landmarks,” a tendency among the Russian 
emigres for a bourgeois republic as against the restoration of tsarism. — Ed. 



I32 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

against all survivals of national oppression and colonial slavery” 
But elirninated it must be, at all costs. And it can be eliminated 
only if real and prolonged assistance is given by the Russian 
proletariat to the backward peoples of the Union in their eco- 
nomic and cultural advancement. Otherwise there are no grounds 
for expecting the establishment of a proper and durable collabora- 
tion of peoples within the framework of a single confederate 
state. Hence, the second immediate task of our party is to strive to 
eliminate the actual inequality of the nationalities and to raise 
the cultural and economic level of the backward peoples. 

This heritage consists, lastly, in the survivals of nationalism 
among a number of peoples which have suffered the heavy yoke 
of national oppression and have not yet managed to rid themselves 
of old national grudges. These survivals find practical expression 
in a certain national aloofness and a lack of complete trust on 
the part of the formerly oppressed peoples in measures proceed- 
ing from the Russians. However, in some of the republics the 
population of which is made up of several nationalities, this de- 
fensive nationalism often turns into aggressive nationalism, into 
the outright chauvinism of the stronger nationality directed against 
the weaker nationalities of these republics. Georgian chauvinism 
(in Georgia) against the Armenians, Ossets, Adjarians and Abkha- 
sians; Azerbaijanian chauvinism (in Azerbaidjan) against the 
Armenians; Uzbek chauvinism (in Bokhara and Kharezm) 
against the Turkmens and Kirghiz— all these forms of chauvin- 
ism, which moreover are fostered by the conditions of the New 
Economic Policy and by competition, are a great evil which 
threatens to make some of the national republics the scene of 
squabbling and wrangling. It need hardly be said that all these 
factors hinder the cause of the actual amalgamation of the peoples 
into a single confederate state. When the survivals of nationalism 
are a peculiar form of defense against Great-Russian chauvinism, 
the surest means of overcoming nationalist survivals is to wage 
determined war on Great-Russian chauvinism. When, however, 
these survivals assume the form of local chauvinism directed 



THESES ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I33 

against the weak national groups in certain of the republics, it is 
the duty of party members to wage direct war on these survivals. 
Thus the third immediate task of our party is to combat national- 
ist survivals, and particularly the chauvinist forms of these sur- 
vivals. 

8. We must regard as one of the most pronounced expressions 
of the heritage of the past the fact that a considerable number of 
Soviet officials in the center and in the localities regard the Union 
of Republics not as an alliance of equal political units, whose 
mission it is to guarantee the free development of the national 
republics, but as a step towards the abolition of these republics 
and as the beginning of the formation of what is called the “single 
and indivisible.” The congress condemns this conception as anti- 
proletarian and reactionary, and calls upon the members of the 
party to keep vigilant watch lest the amalgamation of the repub- 
lics and the fusion of the commissariats be utilized by chauvinisti- 
cally-minded Soviet officials as a screen for their attempts to ignore 
the economic and cultural needs of the national republics. The 
fusion of the commissariats is a test for the Soviet apparatus: if 
this experiment were in practice to betray a Great-Power tendency, 
the party would be obliged to adopt the most resolute measures 
against such a distortion, even to the extent of raising the question 
of annulling the fusion of certain commissariats until such time 
as the Soviet apparatus has been properly re-educated so that it 
will give genuinely proletarian and genuinely fraternal attention 
to the needs and requirements of the small and backward na- 
tionalities. 

9. Since the Union of Republics is a new form of coexistence 
of peoples, a new form of collaboration of peoples within a single 
confederate state, within which the survivals outlined above are 
to be eliminated in the process of co-operative work of the peo- 
ples, the supreme organs of the Union must be so constructed as 
fully to reflect not only the common needs and requirements of 
all the nationalities of the Union, but also the specific needs and 
requirements of each individual nationality. For this reason, there 



134 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

should be created, in addition to the existing central organs of the 
Union, which represent the toiling masses of the entire Union 
without distinction of nationality, a special organ representing all 
the nationalities on an equality basis. Such a structure of the cen- 
tral organs of the Union would make it fully possible to lend an 
attentive ear to the needs and requirements of the peoples, to 
render them timely and necessary aid, to create an atmosphere 
of complete mutual confidence, and thus to nullify the heritage 
mentioned above in the most painless way. 

io. On the basis of what has been said, the congress recom- 
mends the members of the party to secure the accomplishment 
of the following practical measures: 

a. That wi thin the system of supreme organs of the Union a 
special organ be instituted representing on an equality basis all 
the national republics and national regions without exception; 

b. That the Commissariats of the Union be so constructed as 
to assure the satisfaction of the needs and requirements of the 
peoples of the Union; 

c. That the organs of the national republics and regions be 
recruited chiefly from among the local inhabitants acquainted 
with the language, life, manners, and customs of the peoples con- 
cerned. 

II 

i. The development of the organizations of our party in the 
majority of the national republics is taking place under conditions 
which do not wholly favor their growth and consolidation. The 
economic backwardness of these republics, the numerical weak- 
ness of the national proletariat, the shortage or even total lack of 
old party workers belonging to the native population, the lack of 
suitable Marxist literature in the native languages, the weakness 
of party educational work, and, lastly, the persistence of survivals 
of radical-nationalist traditions, which have not yet died out, have 
produced among the local Communists a definite deviation in the 
direction of overrating the specific national features and of under- 



THESES ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I35 

rating the class interests o£ the proletariat, a deviation towards 
nationalism. This factor becomes especially dangerous in the case 
of republics inhabited by several nationalities, where it frequently 
assumes the form of a deviation among the Communists of the 
stronger nationality towards chauvinism directed against the Com- 
munists of the weak nationalities (Georgia, Azerbaidjan, Bokhara, 
Kharezm). The deviation towards nationalism is dangerous be- 
cause, by hindering the emancipation of the national proletariat 
from the ideological influence of the national bourgeoisie, it im- 
pedes the knitting of the proletarians of the various nationalities 
into a single internationalist organization. 

2. On the other hand, the presence, in both the central institu- 
tions of the party and in the organizations of the Communist 
parties of the national republics, of large numbers of old party 
workers of Russian descent, who are unfamiliar with the manners, 
customs, and language of the toiling masses of these republics, 
and who for this reason are not always attentive to their require- 
ments, has given rise in our party to a deviation which consists 
in underrating specific national features and national language in 
party work, to an arrogant and negligent attitude towards these 
specific features— a deviation towards Great-Russian chauvinism. 
This deviation is pernicious not only because, by impeding the 
formation of Communist cadres of local inhabitants acquainted 
with the local language, it creates the danger that the party may 
become isolated from the proletarian masses of the national re- 
publics, but also, and primarily, because it feeds and nourishes the 
deviation towards nationalism outlined above and hinders the 
struggle against this deviation. 

3. Condemning both these deviations as harmful and danger- 
ous to the cause of communism, and drawing the attention of the 
members of the party to the particular danger of the deviation 
towards Great-Russian chauvinism, the congress calls upon the 
party to eliminate as quickly as possible these survivals of the past 
in our party development. 



I36 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

The congress instructs the Central Committee to carry out the 
following practical measures: 

a. To form Marxist study circles of an advanced type among 
the local party workers in the national republics; 

b. To develop literature dealing with fundamental Marxist 
principles written in the native languages; 

c. To reinforce the University of the Peoples of the East and 
its branches in the localities; 

d. To establish groups of instructors of the Central Committees 
of the national Communist parties recruited from among local 
workers; 

e. To develop mass party literature in the native languages; 

£ To intensify party educational work in the republics; 

g. To intensify work among the youth in the republics. 

Theses of the Twelfth Congress of the Russian Com- 
munist Party, 1923. 

Prauda , No. 65, March 24, 1923. 



Report on National Factors in the 

Development of the Party and the State 


The national question is of importance for us from the point of 
view of the internal situation; not only because the former sov- 
ereign nation numerically constitutes about 75,000,000 people and 
the other nations 65,000,000 (no mean figure) and not only because 
the formerly oppressed nationalities inhabit regions most essential 
from the point of view of economic development and most impor- 
tant from the point of view of military strategy, but first and fore- 
most because during the last two years we have introduced what is 
known as the New Economic Policy, as a result of which Russian 
nationalism has grown and become accentuated, the idea of Smeno- 
vekhism has been born, and the desire is rife to accomplish peace- 
fully what Denikin failed to accomplish — to create the so-called 
“single and indivisible.” 

Thus, as a result of the New Economic Policy, a new force is 
being engendered in the internal life of our country — Great-Rus- 
sian chauvinism, which breeds in our institutions, which penetrates 
not only into Soviet institutions, but also into party institutions, 
and which stalks in every corner of our federation. And if we do 
not resolutely repulse this new force, if we do not strike at its roots 
— and the conditions of the New Economic Policy favor its growth 
— we shall be faced with the risk of a rupture between the prole- 
tariat of the former sovereign nation and the peasantry of the 
formerly oppressed nations — which will mean the undermining of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat. 

But the New Economic Policy fosters not only Russian chauvin- 
ism — -it also fosters local varieties of chauvinism, especially in re- 
publics composed of several nationalities. I have in mind Georgia, 
Azerbaijan, Bokhara and — one might partly add — Turkestan, in 

137 



I38 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

all of which there are several nationalities, the foremost elements 
of which may soon begin to compete among themselves for suprem- 
acy. Of course, these local varieties of chauvinism are not as strong 
and therefore not as dangerous as Great-Russian chauvinism. But 
they are dangerous nevertheless, for they threaten to turn some of 
our republics into the scene of national wrangling and thus weaken 
the bonds of internationalism In these republics. 

What is the class essence of the national question ? What is the 
national question? The essential thing in the national question 
from the class point of view is to establish definite relations — I am 
speaking of our Soviet conditions — to establish definite and correct 
relations between the proletariat of the former sovereign nation 
and the peasantry of the formerly oppressed nationalities. The 
question of the alliance between the proletariat and the peasantry 
has been more than sufficiently discussed here, but when this ques- 
tion was discussed in connection with the reports of Comrades 
Kamenev, Kalinin, and Sokolnikov, and even of Comrades Rykov 
and Trotsky, the chief thing in mind was the relations between the 
Russian proletariat and the Russian peasantry. Here, in the national 
sphere, we are dealing with a more complex mechanism. Here we 
are concerned with the question of establishing proper relations 
between the proletariat of the former sovereign nation, which rep- 
resents the most cultured section of the proletariat among all the 
nations of our federation, and the peasantry, mainly the peasantry 
of the formerly oppressed nationalities. That is the class essence 
of the national question. If the proletariat succeeds in establishing 
— with regard to the peasantry of other nationalities — relations that 
will be capable of eradicating all remnants of mistrust towards 
everything Russian, a mistrust implanted and fostered for decades 
by the policy of tsarism; if, moreover, the Russian proletariat suc- 
ceeds in bringing about complete mutual understanding and con- 
fidence, in effecting a genuine alliance not only between the Russian 
proletariat and the Russian peasantry, but also between the Rus- 
sian proletariat and the peasantry of other nationalities, the 
problem will be solved. To achieve this it is necessary that the 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I39 

government o £ the proletariat should be as dear to the peasantry 
o£ other nationalities as it is to the Russian peasantry. And in 
order that the Soviet government should become dear also to the 
peasantry of other nationalities, it must be comprehensible to this 
peasantry, it must function in their own language, the schools and 
government bodies must be recruited from among the local people 
acquainted with the language, manners, customs, and traditions. 
Only when the institutions and government bodies in the republics 
of these countries speak and function in the native language, only 
then, and only to that extent, will the Soviet government, which 
until very recently was a Russian government, become a govern- 
ment that is not only Russian but inter-national, a government that 
will be near and dear to the peasants of the formerly oppressed 
nationalities. That is one of the fundamental factors in the national 
problem in general, and in the national problem under Soviet 
conditions in particular. 

What is the characteristic feature of the solution of the national 
problem at the present moment, in 1923? What form has been 
assumed in 1923 by the problems requiring solution in the na- 
tional sphere? They have assumed the form of establishing col- 
laboration between the peoples of our federation in the economic, 
military, and political spheres. I am referring to inter-national 
relations. The national problem, the crux of which is the estab- 
lishment of proper relations between the proletariat of the former 
sovereign nation and the peasantry of other nationalities, has at 
the present moment assumed a specific form involving the estab- 
lishment of the collaboration and the fraternal coexistence of 
peoples which in the past were disunited and which are now 
amalgamated within a single state. That is the crux of the national 
problem in the form it has assumed in 1923. The concrete form 
taken by this political amalgamation is the Union of Republics, 
which we discussed at the Congress of Soviets at the end of last 
year and which we then established. 

The basis of this Union is voluntary consent and equality of 
legal status of the members of the Union. Voluntary consent and 



I4O MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

equality — because our national program is based on the right 
of nations to independent political existence, formerly called the 
right of nations to self-determination. On this basis we must defi- 
nitely say that no union of peoples, no amalgamation of peoples 
into a single state, can be durable unless it is based on absolutely 
voluntary consent, unless the peoples involved themselves desire to 
unite. The second basis of the Union is the equality of legal status 
of the peoples forming the Union. And that is but natural. I am 
not referring to actual equality — of that I shall speak later for 
the establishment of actual equality between nationalities which 
have gone on ahead and nationalities which lag behind is a very 
complex, very difficult problem, requiring many years for its solu- 
tion. I am speaking at present of equality of legal status. Equality 
in this sense is expressed in the fact that all the republics, in this 
case the four republics forming the Union — Transcaucasia, White 
Russia, the Ukraine and the R.S.F.S.R — enjoy the benefits of the 
Union to an equal degree and at the same time to an equal degree 
forego certain of their independent rights in favor of the Union. 
If the R.S.F.S.R., the Ukraine, White Russia and the Transcauca- 
sian Republics are not each to have its own People’s Commissariat 
of Foreign Affairs, it is clear that the abolition of these com- 
missariats and the establishment of a joint commissariat for the 
Union of Republics will be accompanied by a certain restriction 
of the independence formerly enjoyed by these republics, and 
that the extent of this restriction will be the same for all the 
republics forming the Union. It is clear that if these republics 
formerly had their own People’s Commissariats of Foreign Trade, 
and these commissariats are now abolished, both in the R.S.F.S.R. 
and in the other republics, in order to make way for a joint Com- 
missariat of the Union of Republics, this too will involve a certain 
restriction of the independence formerly enjoyed in full measure, 
but now curtailed in favor of the Union; and so on and so forth. 
Some people ask a purely scholastic question — whether after amal- 
gamation the republics remain independent. This is a scholastic 
question. Their independence is restricted, for every amalgama- 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I4I 

tion involves a certain restriaion of the rights of the amalgamating 
parties. But the elements of independence of each of these repub- 
lics undoubtedly remain, for each republic retains the right to 
leave the Union at its own discretion. There you have the elements 
of independence, the maximum of independence, which is po- 
tentially retained by each of the republics forming part of the 
Union and which each of them is always at liberty to exercise. 

Thus the concrete form assumed by the national problem under 
the conditions prevailing In our country at the present moment is 
to achieve collaboration between the peoples in economic matters, 
foreign policy, and military affairs. We must unite the republics 
along these lines into a single union, known as the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics. Such are the concrete forms assumed 
by the national problem at the present time. 

But that is easier said than done. 

The fact of the matter is that under the conditions in our coun- 
try there are not only a number of factors favoring amalgama- 
tion of the peoples into a single state but also factors hindering 
amalgamation. 

The favorable factors we know. They are, first, the economic 
ties between the peoples, which were set up before the time of 
the Soviet government but which the Soviet government strength- 
ened — a certain division of labor among the peoples, begun before 
our time, but accentuated by us, by the Soviet government. That 
is the chief factor favoring the amalgamation of the republics 
into the Union. The nature of the Soviet government must be 
regarded as the second factor favoring amalgamation. This is 
only natural. The Soviet government is a government of the work- 
ers, a dictatorship of the proletariat, which by its very nature 
encourages the toiling elements of the republics and peoples form- 
ing the Union to get into friendly relations with each other. This 
is only natural. And the third factor favoring amalgamation is 
the imperialist encirclement, which constitutes the environment in 
which the Union of Republics has to operate. 

But there are also factors hindering and impeding such an amal- 



142 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

gamation. The principal force hindering the amalgamation of the 
republics into a single union is the force which, as I have said, is 
growing in our country under the influence of the New Economic 
Policy— Great-Russian chauvinism. It is not fortuitous, comrades, 
that the Smenovekhists have recruited a large number of sup- 
porters from among the Soviet officials. That is by no means for- 
tuitous. Nor is it fortuitous that Messrs, the Smenovekhists are 
lauding the Bolshevik Communists, saying, as it were: You may 
talk as much as you like about Bolshevism, you may prate as 
much as you like about your internationalist tendencies, but we 
know that what Denikin failed to do you will do, that you Bol- 
sheviks have resurrected, or at least are going to resurrect, the 
great idea of a great Russia. All this is not fortuitous. Nor is it 
fortuitous that this idea has penetrated even into some of our 
party institutions. 

At the February Plenum, where the question of a Second 
Chamber was first raised, I myself was a witness to utterances on 
the part of members of the Central Committee which were not in 
harmony with communism— utterances entirely alien to inter- 
nationalism. All this is a sign of the times, an epidemic. The chief 
danger arising from this is that, owing to the New Economic 
Policy, Great-Power chauvinism is growing in our country daily 
and hourly— Great-Power chauvinism, the rankest kind of na- 
tionalism, which strives to obliterate all that is not Russian, to 
gather all the threads of administration into the hands of Russians 
and to crush everything that is not Russian. The chief danger is 
that such a policy involves the risk that the Russian proletariat 
may forfeit the confidence of the formerly oppressed peoples, 
which it won in the days of the October Revolution, when the 
Russian proletarians overthrew the landlords and the Russian 
capitalists, when they, the Russian proletarians, smashed national 
oppression, evacuated the troops from Persia and Mongolia, pro- 
claimed the independence of Finland and Armenia, and generally 
placed the national question on an entirely new basis. We may 
lose every shred of the confidence we gained at that time unless 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I43 

we arm ourselves against this new, I repeat, Great-Russian chau- 
vinism, which creeps along without face or form, insinuating itself 
drop by drop into the eyes and ears, drop by drop changing the 
mind and soul of our political workers, so that one can hardly 
recognize them. It is this danger, comrades, that we must end 
at all costs; otherwise we run the risk of losing the confidence of 
the workers and peasants of the formerly oppressed peoples, we 
run the risk that the ties may be snapped between these peoples 
and the Russian proletariat, which Involves the risk of a fissure 
in the system of our dictatorship. Do not forget, comrades, that we 
advanced against Kerensky with flying colors and overthrew the 
Provisional Government partly because we were backed by the 
confidence of those oppressed peoples which were expecting lib- 
eration at the hands of the Russian proletarians. 

Do not forget such reserves as those constituted by the oppressed 
peoples, who remain silent, but whose very silence exerts pressure 
and decides much. This is often not felt, but these peoples live, 
they exist, and they must not be forgotten. Yes, comrades, it is 
dangerous to forget them. Do not forget that if in the rear of 
Kolchak, Denikin, Wrangel, and Yudenich we had not had the 
so-called “aliens,” the oppressed peoples, who disorganized the 
rear of these generals by their tacit sympathy for the Russian pro- 
letarians — comrades, this is a specific factor in our development, 
this tacit sympathy, which nobody hears or sees, but which decides 
everything— if it were not for this sympathy, we would not have 
nailed a single one of these generals. While we were advancing on 
them, their rear was disintegrating. Why? Because these generals 
depended on the colonizing elements among the Cossacks, they 
held out to the oppressed peoples the prospect of further op- 
pression, and the oppressed peoples were therefore forced into 
our arms, while we held aloft the banner of the liberation of these 
oppressed peoples. That is what decided the fate of these generals; 
those are the factors which, although they are obscured by the 
victories of our armies, in the long run decided everything. This 
must not be forgotten. That is why we must make an abrupt 



144 marxism and the national question 

change of front In the sense of combating the new chauvinist tend- 
encies and pillorying those bureaucrats in our Institutions and 
those party comrades who are forgetting one of our gains in the 
October Revolution— the confidence of the formerly oppressed 
peoples, a confidence we must cherish. 

That Is the first, and the most dangerous, factor hindering the 
amalgamation of the peoples and republics into a single union. 
It must be understood that if a force like Great-Russian chauvin- 
ism begins to Sourish and gets its way, farewell to the confidence 
of the formerly oppressed peoples; we shall never secure collabora- 
tion within a single union, and we shall never have a Union of 
Republics. 

The second factor hindering a union of the formerly oppressed 
peoples around the Russian proletariat, comrades, lies in the actual 
Inequality which we have inherited from the period of tsarism. 

We have proclaimed equality of legal status and are practicing 
it; but equality of legal status, although in itself a factor of the 
greatest importance in the history of the development of the Soviet 
republics, is still a long way from true equality. Formally, all 
the backward nationalities and all the tribes enjoy all the rights 
enjoyed by the other, more advanced, nationalities of our federa- 
tion. But the trouble is that some nationalities have no proletarians 
of their own, have never passed through the stage of industrial 
development, or even entered that stage, are frightfully backward 
culturally and are entirely unable to take advantage of the rights 
granted them by the revolution. This, comrades, is a question of 
greater importance than the question of schools. Some of our 
comrades here think that the knot can be unraveled by stressing 
the question of schools and language. That is not so, comrades. 
Schools will not get you very far. The schools are developing, 
so are the languages; but actual inequality is the basis of all dis- 
cord and friction. Talk of schools and language is not enough. 
What Is wanted is real, systematic, sincere and genuine proletarian 
assistance to the toiling masses of the culturally and economically 
backward nationalities. Apart from schools and language, the Rus- 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I45 

si an proletariat must take every necessary measure to establish 
centers of industry in the border regions, in the republics which 
are culturally backward — backward not through any fault of their 
own, but because they were formerly looked upon as sources of 
raw materials. 

Certain attempts have already been made in this direction. One 
factory from Moscow has already been transferred to Georgia and 
will probably soon start operation. Bokhara has taken one factory, 
and might have taken four. Turkestan is taking one large factory. 
Thus conditions now exist enabling these republics, which are 
backward economically and possess no proletariat, to establish, 
with the aid of the Russian proletariat, their own centers of in- 
dustry, small though they may be, in order to create in these 
centers groups of local proletarians who will serve as a bridge 
between the Russian proletarians and peasants and the toilers of 
these republics. In this sphere serious work is required; and 
here talk of schools and language alone is not enough. 

But there is still a third factor hindering the amalgamation of 
the republics into a single union: it is the existence of nationalism 
in the individual republics. The New Economic Policy affects not 
only the Russian, but also the non-Russian population. The New 
Economic Policy is fostering private trade and industry not only 
in the center of Russia, but also in the individual republics. And 
this New Economic Policy, and private capital, which is associated 
with it, nourishes and fosters Georgian, Azerbaijanian, Uzbek, 
and other nationalism. Of course, if there were no Great-Russian 
chauvinism — which is aggressive because it is strong, because it 
always has been strong, and which has retained the habit of op- 
pressing and humiliating — if there were no Great-Russian chau- 
vinism, local chauvinism, as a reaction to Great-Russian chauvin- 
ism, might perhaps have existed, so to speak, only in the smallest 
way, in miniature, because anti-Russian nationalism is in the long 
run a defense, a rather ugly form of defense against Russian 
nationalism, against Russian chauvinism. If this nationalism were 
only defensive, it might not be worth making a fuss about. We 



I46 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

could concentrate our entire weight of action, the entire weight 
of struggle, on Great-Russian chauvinism, in the hope that if this 
powerful enemy were overcome, anti-Russian nationalism would 
be overcome with it; for, I repeat, this nationalism is in the long 
run a reaction to Great-Russian nationalism, a reply to it, a defi- 
nite form of defense. Yes, that would be so if anti-Russian national- 
ism in the localities were nothing more than a reaction to Russian 
nationalism. But the trouble is that in some republics this de- 
fensive nationalism becomes converted into aggressive nation- 
alism. 

Take Georgia. Over 30 per cent of its population are non- 
Georgians. They include Armenians, Abkhasians, Adjarians, 
Ossets and Tatars. The Georgians dominate. And among a cer- 
tain section of the Georgian Communists the idea has been devel- 
oping that there is no particular need to reckon with these small 
nationalities; they are less cultured, less developed, and there is 
therefore no need to reckon with them. This is chauvinism — a 
harmful and dangerous chauvinism; for it may turn, and has al- 
ready turned, the small republic of Georgia into an arena of 
discord. 

Take Azerbaidjan: Here the Azerbaijanians are the principal 
nationality, but there are also Armenians. Among a certain section 
of the Azerbaidjanians there is also a tendency, sometimes quite 
unconcealed, to think that the Azerbaidjanians are the native 
population of the country and the Armenians are intruders, and 
that on these grounds it is perhaps possible to push them some- 
what into the background, to disregard their interests. This is 
also chauvinism. It undermines that equality of nationalities on 
which die Soviet power is based. 

Take Bokhara: In Bokhara there are three nationalities — the 
Uzbeks, who constitute the principal nationality, the Turkmens, 
who from the point of view of Bokharan chauvinism are a “less 
important” nationality, and the Kirghiz, who are few in number 
and are “less important.” 

In Kharezm you have the same thing — Turkmens and Uzbeks. 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I47 

The Uzbeks are the principal nationality and the Turkmens are 
“less important.’ 9 

All this leads to conflict, and weakens the Soviet power. This 
tendency towards local chauvinism must also be stricken, root and 
branch. Of course, local chauvinism is not as important as Great- 
Russian chauvinism, which in the general scheme of the national 
question comprises three quarters of the whole; but from the 
point of view of local work, of the local people, from the point of 
view of the peaceful development of the national republics them- 
selves, this chauvinism is a factor of prime moment. 

Sometimes this chauvinism begins to undergo a very interesting 
evolution. I have in mind Transcaucasia. You know that Trans- 
caucasia consists of three republics embracing ten nationalities. 
From very early times Transcaucasia has been the scene of mas- 
sacre and strife and, under the Mensheviks and nationalists, the 
scene of warfare. You know of the Georgian-Armenian War. You 
also know of the massacres which took place at the beg innin g 
of 1904 and the end of 1905. I could name several districts where 
the Armenian majority massacred the entire remaining part of 
the population, which consisted of Tatars. Take Zangezur, for 
Instance: in this region the majority of the population are Ar- 
menians, and they massacred all the Tatars. I could name another 
province — Nakhichevan. There the Tatars predominated, and 
they massacred all the Armenians. That was just before the 
liberation of Armenia and Georgia from the yoke of imperialism. 

[Voice: That was their way of solving the national problem.] 

This also, of course, was a way of solving the national problem. 
But it is not the Soviet way. Of course, the Russians have nothing 
to do with this state of mutual national enmity, for it is the 
Tatars and Armenians who are fighting, and the Russians are 
not involved. That is why a special organ is required in Trans- 
caucasia to regulate the relations between the nationalities. It may 
safely be said that the relations between the proletariat of formerly 
sovereign Russia and the toilers of all the other nationalities make 
up three-quarters of the national question. But one-quarter of 



I48 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

this question must be attributed to the relations of the formerly 
oppressed nationalities among themselves. 

And if in this atmosphere of mutual mistrust the Soviet govern- 
ment failed to establish in Transcaucasia an organ of national 
peace capable of adjusting all friction and conflict, we should 
return to the epoch of tsarism, or to the epoch of the Dashnaks, # 
the Mussavatists,f the Mensheviks, the epoch when people burnt 
and massacred each other. That is why the Central Committee 
has thrice reaffirmed the necessity of preserving the Transcau- 
casian Federation as an organ of national peace. 

There has been and still is a group of Georgian Communists 
who do not object to Georgia’s amalgamation with the Union of 
Republics, but do object to this amalgamation being effected 
through the Transcaucasian Federation. You see, they would 
like to get closer to the Union, they want no intermediary between 
themselves — the Georgians— and the Union of Republics in the 
shape of the Transcaucasian Federation; the federation, they say, 
is unnecessary. This sounds very revolutionary. But the idea be- 
hind it is a different one. In the first place, these statements in- 
dicate that in the national question in Georgia the attitude to- 
wards the Russians is of secondary importance, for these deviator 
comrades (so they are called) have nothing against the direct 
amalgamation of Georgia with the Union; that is, they do not 
fear Great-Russian chauvinism, considering that in one way or 
another it has been undermined, or at any rate is not of decisive 
importance. It is evidently the federation of Transcaucasia they 
fear most. Why? Why, when the three peoples which inhabit 
Transcaucasia, which fought among themselves so long, which 
massacred each other, and warred on each other, have at last been 
united by the Soviet government by bonds of fraternal unity in 
the form of a federation — why, when this federation has now pro- 
duced genuine fruits of mutual amity, are these bonds to be 
broken? What is the trouble, comrades? The trouble is, comrades, 

# Dashnaks — an Armenian petty-bourgeois nationalist party. — Ed. 

f Mussavatists — a petty-bourgeois nationalist party in Azerbaidjan. — Ed, 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE 1 49 

that the bonds of federation deprive Georgia of that somewhat 
privileged position which she might assume in virtue of her 
geographical position. Judge for yourselves. Georgia has her own 
port— Batum — to which goods from the West flow; Georgia has 
a railway center like Tiflis, which cannot be avoided by the Ar- 
menians, nor by Azerbaidjan, which receives all its goods through 
Batum. If Georgia were a separate republic, if she were not part of 
the Transcaucasian Federation, she could present a certain little 
ultimatum both to Armenia, which cannot get along without 
Tiflis, and to Azerbaidjan, which cannot get along without 
Batum. Here would be certain advantages. 

It is not fortuitous, comrades, that it was in Georgia that the 
monstrous decree on the cordon was elaborated.* The blame for 
this is now being shifted to the shoulders of Serebryakov. Suppose 
that is so. But the decree originated in Georgia, and not in Azer- 
baidjan or Armenia. It is not fortuitous that there was such a 
decree, which was intended so to regulate the relations between 
the national groups of the population as to retain certain advan- 
tages for Georgia and to enable Georgia to utilize the favorable 
geographical position which she undoubtedly possesses and which 
she, in the person of the deviators, does not want to lose. Then 
there is another cause. Tiflis is the capital of Georgia, but the 
Georgians there are not more than 25 per cent, the Armenians not 
less than 35 per cent, and the rest belong to other nationalities. 
There’s a capital of Georgia for you! If Georgia were a separate 
republic, a certain transplantation of population might be ef- 
fected — for instance, the Armenian population might be removed 
from Tiflis. Was there not such a decree, of which Comrade 
Makharadze said that it was directed against the Armenians? A 
certain transplantation might be effected so as to diminish the 
proportion of Armenians to Georgians in Tiflis from year to year, 
and thus convert Tiflis into a genuinely Georgian capital. I grant 
that they have abandoned the decree on eviction. But they possess 

* A decree by the Georgian government against famine refugees from the 
Volga Region in 1921. — Ed. 



I5O MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

a vast number o£ possibilities, a vast number of flexible forms — 
such as “relieving” the town— by which it would be possible, while 
maintaining the semblance of internationalism, to arrange matters 
in such a way that there would be fewer Armenians in Tiflis. It 
is these geographical advantages, which the deviators do not want 
to lose, and the disadvantages of the Georgians in Tiflis, where the 
number of Georgians is less than that of the Armenians, that are 
causing our deviators to be opposed to the federation. The Men- 
sheviks simply evicted Armenians and Tatars from Tiflis. Now, 
under Soviet rule, eviction is impossible; therefore one must leave 
the federation, for this will create legal opportunities for perform- 
ing Independently certain operations which would result in the 
advantageous position enjoyed by the Georgians being fully util- 
ized ag ain st Azerbaidjan and Armenia. And the result would be 
to create a privileged position for the Georgians in Transcaucasia. 
Therein lies the whole danger. Can we ignore the interests of 
national peace in Transcaucasia and create conditions under 
which the Georgians would be in a privileged position in relation 
to the republics of Armenia and Azerbaidjan? No. We cannot 
allow that 

There is an old, specific system of ruling, under which a bour- 
geois government makes certain nationalities its favorites, grants 
them privileges and humbles the other nations, not wishing to be 
bothered with them. Thus by placing one nationality in a favored 
position it uses it to press on the others. Such, for instance, was the 
method of rule in Austria. Everyone remembers the statement of 
the Austrian minister Beist, who summoned the Hungarian min- 
ister and said: “You manage your hordes and I’ll look after mine”; 
that is, you crush and press on your nationalities in Hungary and 
I will press on my own. You and I are privileged nations, and we 
will press on the rest. The same was the case with the Poles in 
Austria. The Austrians put the Poles in a favored position, granted 
them privileges, in order that the Poles should help the Austrians 
strengthen their positions in Poland; and in return they allowed 
the Poles to strangle Galicia. This system of picking out a few 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE 151 

nationalities and granting them privileges in order to crush the 
rest is specifically and purely Austrian. From the point of view of 
the bureaucracy, this is an economical method of ruling, because 
it is necessary to bother only with one nationality; but from the 
political point of view it is fatal, for to violate the principle of 
equality of nations and to grant privileges to any one nationality 
is to doom one’s national policy to certain failure. 

Great Britain is now ruling India in exactly the same way. In 
order to make it easier, from the point of view of the bureaucracy, 
to deal with the nationalities and tribes of India, Great Britain has 
divided India into British India (240,000,000 population) and 
native India (72,000,000 population). Why? Because Great Britain 
wanted to pick out one group of nations and grant it privileges 
in order to make it easier to rule the remaining nationalities. There 
are no less than eight hundred nationalities in India, and Great 
Britain decided that, rather than bother with eight hundred nation- 
alities separately, it is better to pick out a few nations, grant them 
certain privileges and through them rule the rest; for, first, the 
discontent of the other nations would in that case be directed 
against these favorites and not against Great Britain, and, secondly, 
it is cheaper to “bother” with two or three nations than with eight 
hundred. 

That is also a nice little system of governing, the British system. 
What does It lead to? To a cheaper apparatus — that is true. But, 
comrades, if we disregard bureaucratic conveniences, this means 
death to British rule in India; this system, as certain as twice two 
is four, bears within it the doom of British rule and British 
domination. 

It is into this dangerous road that our comrades, the Georgian 
deviators, are impelling us when they resist federation, violate all 
the laws of the party and want to separate from the federation in 
order to retain their advantageous position. They are trying to get 
us to grant them certain privileges at the expense of the Armenian 
and Azerbaidjanian republics. But this is a road we cannot take, 



152 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

for it means certain doom for our entire policy and for Soviet 
government in the Caucasus. 

It is not without good reason that this danger was sensed by our 
comrades in Georgia. This Georgian chauvinism, having assumed 
the offensive against the Armenians and Azerbaijanians, roused 
the Communist Party of Georgia. It is not without good reason 
that the Communist Party of Georgia, which within the period 
of its legal existence has held two congresses, on both occasions 
unanimously rejected the position of the deviator comrades. For 
without the Transcaucasian Federation it would be impossible to 
maintain peace in the Caucasus, it would be impossible to establish 
equality. One nation must not be permitted more privileges than 
another. This our comrades have sensed. That is why after two 
years of contention the Mdivani group represents a small handful, 
repeatedly expelled by the party in Georgia herself. 

Nor is it without good reason that Comrade Lenin was so press- 
ing and insistent that the federation should be established immedi- 
ately. Nor is it without good reason that our Central Committee 
thrice reaffirmed the need for a federation in Transcaucasia, with 
Its own Central Executive Committee and its own executive 
authority, the decisions of which would be binding on the repub- 
lics. Nor is it without good reason that both the commissions — 
that of Comrade Dzerzhinsky and that of Comrades Kamenev and 
Kuibyshev — stated upon their arrival in Moscow that federation 
Is indispensable. 

Nor, finally, is it without good reason that the Mensheviks of 
the Sotsialistiches'ky Vestni\ laud our deviator comrades and sing 
their praises for resisting federation: birds of a feather flock 
together. 

I now pass, comrades, to an examination of the ways and means 
of eliminating these three main factors hindering union — Great- 
Russian chauvinism, actual inequality and local nationalism, par- 
ticularly when the latter assumes the form of chauvinism. Of the 
methods that may help us painlessly to outgrow this heritage of 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I53 

the past which is hindering closer relations between the nations, 
I shall mention only three. 

The first method is to adopt every possible measure to make the 
Soviet government understood and loved in the republics, to make 
the Soviet government not merely Russian but international. This 
requires that not only the schools, but all institutions and all bodies, 
both party and Soviet, should become steadily naturalized, that 
they should employ the language understood by the masses and 
function under conditions answering to the habits of the given 
people. This condition alone will make it possible to convert the 
Soviet government from a Russian government into an interna- 
tional government, a government understood by and near and dear 
to the toiling masses of all the republics, particularly to those which 
are economically and culturally backward. 

The second method that may help us painlessly to outgrow the 
heritage left by tsarism and the bourgeoisie is to construct the Com- 
missariats of the Union of Republics in such a way as to enable at 
least the chief nationalities to have their representatives on the 
colleglums and to create conditions in which the needs and require- 
ments of the various republics will be unconditionally met. 

The third method is to have among our supreme organs one that 
will serve to express the needs and requirements of every republic 
and nationality without exception. I want to draw particular atten- 
tion to this latter point. 

If within the Central Executive Committee of the Union we 
could create two chambers, one of which would be elected at the 
Union Congress of Soviets, irrespective of nationality, and the other 
would be elected by the republics and regions (all the republics 
being equally represented and all the national regions being equally 
represented) and endorsed by the Congress of Soviets of the Union 
of Republics, I think that our supreme institutions would express 
not only the class interests of all proletarian groups without excep- 
tion, but also purely national needs. We should have an organ 
which would reflect the specific interests of the nationalities, peo- 
ples, and tribes inhabiting the territories of the Union of Republics. 



154 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Under the conditions prevailing in our Union, which embraces 
not less than 140,000,000 people, of which about 65,000,000 are non- 
Russians, one cannot, in such a state, govern without having before 
us here, in Moscow, in the supreme organ of government, emis- 
saries of these nationalities who can express not only the interests 
common to the proletariat as a whole, but also the interests which 
are particularly, specially, and specifically national. Without this, 
comrades. It will be impossible to govern. Unless we have this 
barometer, comrades, unless we have people capable of formulating 
these specific needs of the various nationalities, it will be impossible 
to govern. 

There are two ways of governing a country. One way is to have 
a simplified apparatus, headed by a group of people, or by a single 
person, having hands and eyes in the localities in the shape of 
governors. This is a very simple form of government, under which 
the ruler, in governing the country, receives the kind of informa- 
tion governors can supply, and consoles himself with the hope that 
he Is governing honestly and well. Friction arises, friction passes 
into conflicts and conflicts into revolts. The revolts are then crushed. 
This Is not our system of government; besides, although simple, 
it is too costly. In our Soviet country we must evolve a system of 
government which will permit us, with certainty, to anticipate all 
changes, to perceive everything that is going on among the peas- 
ants, the nationals, the non-Russian nations and the Russians; the 
system of supreme organs must possess a number of barometers 
which will anticipate every change, register and forestall a Bas- 
mach movement, a bandit movement, Kronstadt, and all possible 
storms and ill-fortune. That is the Soviet system of government. 
It is called the Soviet government, the people’s government, be- 
cause, being based on the rank and file, it is the first to register 
changes, to take necessary measures and rectify the line in time 
if it has become distorted — criticizing itself and rectifying its line. 
This system of government is the Soviet system, and it requires 
that among the number of our supreme bodies should be such as 
will give exhaustive expression to national needs and requirements. 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE 1 55 

The objection Is made that this will complicate the whole system 
of government, that it will pile body on body. That Is true. Hitherto 
we had the Central Executive Committee of the R.S.F.S.R., then 
we created the Central Executive Committee of the Union, and 
now it seems we shall have to split the Central Executive Commit- 
tee of the Union Into two. It can’t be helped. I said that the simplest 
form of government is to have one man and to give him governors. 
But now, after the October Revolution, we cannot try such experi- 
ments. The system has become more complex, but it makes govern- 
ment easier and lends the form of government a profoundly Soviet 
character. That is why I think that the congress must agree to the 
establishment of a special organ, a second chamber within the 
Central Executive Committee of the Union, since it is an abso- 
lutely indispensable organ. 

I will not say that this is a perfect form of organizing collabora- 
tion between the peoples of the Union; I will not say that it is the 
last word In science; by no means. We shall have many occasions 
to discuss the national question, for national and international 
conditions change, and may change again. I do not swear that some 
of the commissariats we are merging in the Union of Republics 
will not have to be separated again if experience shows that the 
merging of some of the commissariats produces negative results. 

But one thing is clear — that under present conditions and in 
present circumstances there is no better method and no more suit- 
able organ. As yet we have no better means or method of creating 
an organ capable of reflecting all the oscillations and all the changes 
that take place within the various parts of the republic than by the 
institution of a second chamber. It need hardly be said that the sec- 
ond chamber must consist of representatives not only of the four 
republics that have united, but of all the peoples; for the ques- 
tion concerns not only the republics which have formally united 
(there are four of them), but all the peoples and nationalities. We 
therefore require a form that will reflect the needs of all the peoples 
and republics without exception. 

To sum up, comrades. We see that the importance of the national 



156 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

question is determined by the new situation in international affairs, 
by the fact that w T e must here, in Russia, in our federation, solve 
the national problem in a correct, a model way, in order to set an 
example to the East, which represents the heavy reserves of our 
revolution, and thus increase the confidence in and urge towards 
our federation. From the point of view of the internal situation the 
New Economic Policy, the growing Great-Russian chauvinism and 
local chauvinism also compel us to emphasize the particular impor- 
tance of the national question. 

I then said that the essence of the national problem is to establish 
correct relations between the proletariat of the former sovereign 
nation and the peasantry of the former non-sovereign nations and 
that from this point of view the concrete form of solution of the 
national problem at the present moment is to find the way, the 
means of bringing about the collaboration and coexistence of 
the peoples within a Union of Republics, within a single state. 

I further spoke of the factors which favor such closer relations 
between the peoples; I spoke of the factors which impede such 
amalgamation. I dealt especially with Great-Russian chauvinism, 
as a force that is gaining in strength. This force constitutes the 
chief danger tending to undermine the confidence of the formerly 
oppressed peoples in the Russian proletariat. This is our most dan- 
gerous enemy, which we must overcome; for once we overcome it, 
we shall have overcome nine-tenths of the nationalism which has 
survived and which is developing in certain republics. 

Further, we are faced with the danger of being impelled by cer- 
tain groups of comrades into granting privileges to certain nation- 
alities at the expense of others. I have said that this is a road we 
cannot take, because it implies the development of local nationalism 
in its ugliest, most chauvinistic forms, and because it may under- 
mine national peace and kill the confidence of the masses of other 
nations in Soviet government. 

I further said that the chief means that may enable us to elimi- 
nate most painlessly the factors hindering amalgamation is a sec- 
ond chamber in the Central Executive Committee, of which I spoke 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I57 

more openly at the February Plenum of the Central Committee, 
and which is dealt with in the theses in a more veiled form in order 
to enable the comrades themselves, perhaps, to indicate, to sketch, 
some other, more flexible form, some other, more suitable organ 
capable of reflecting the interests of the nationalities. Such are the 
conclusions. 

I think that only in this way shall we be able to achieve a correct 
solution of the national problem, shall we be able to unfurl the 
banner of proletarian revolution and rally to it the sympathy and 
confidence of the countries of the East, which are the heavy reserves 
of our revolution and which may play a decisive part in the coming 
battles of the proletariat against imperialism. 

REPLY TO THE DISCUSSION 

Before proceeding to report on the work of the committee on the 
national question, permit me to object on two main points to those 
who have spoken on my report. It will take about twenty minutes, 
not more. 

The first question is that one group of comrades, headed by 
Comrades Bukharin and Rakovsky, have attached too much im- 
portance to the national question, have exaggerated it, and on 
account of the national question have overlooked the social ques- 
tion, the question of the power of the working class. 

And yet it is clear to us, as Communists, that the basis of all our 
work must be to strengthen the power of the workers; and only 
then do we address ourselves to the other question — a very impor- 
tant question, but subordinate to the first — the national question. 
We are told that we must not injure the nationals. That is perfectly 
true; I agree that we must not injure them. But to evolve out of 
this a new theory to the effect that the Great-Russian proletariat 
must be placed in a position of inequality with regard to the for- 
merly oppressed nations is absurd. Comrade Bukharin has con- 
verted into a regular slogan what was merely a figure of speech 
in Comrade Lenin’s article. Yet it is clear that the political basis 



158 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

of the dictatorship of the proletariat consists mainly and primarily 
of the central, the industrial regions, and not the border regions, 
which are peasant countries. If we overemphasize the peasant 
border regions at the expense of the proletarian districts, a fissure 
In the system of the dictatorship of the proletariat may result. This 
is dangerous, comrades. We must not overshoot the mark in poli- 
tics, just as we must not undershoot it. 

It should be borne in mind that besides the right of nations to 
self-determination there Is also the right of the working class to 
consolidate its power, and to this latter right the right of self- 
determination is subordinate. There are occasions when the right 
of self-determination conflicts with the other, the higher right— the 
right of a working class that has assumed power to consolidate its 
power. In such cases — -this must be said bluntly — the right to self- 
determination cannot and must not serve as an obstacle to the exer- 
cise by the working class of its right to dictatorship. The former 
must give way to the latter. That, for instance, was the case in 1920, 
when in order to defend the power of the working class we were 
obliged to march on Warsaw. 

It must therefore not be forgotten when handing out all sorts of 
promises to the nationals, when bowing and scraping before the 
representatives of the nationalities, as certain comrades at the pres- 
ent congress did, it must be borne in mind that the sphere of action 
of the national question, its competence, so to speak, are, in view 
of our external and internal situation, confined within the sphere 
of action and competence of the “labor question,” as the funda- 
mental question. 

A great many speakers here have referred to notes and articles 
by Vladimir Ilyich. I would rather not have quoted my teacher. 
Comrade Lenin, since he is not here, and I am afraid of quoting 
him wrongly and inappropriately. Nevertheless, I feel obliged to 
refer to one passage, which is axiomatic and can give rise to no 
misunderstanding, in order that there should be no doubts in the 
minds of comrades with regard to the relative importance of the 
national question. Analyzing Marx’s letter on the national ques- 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE I59 

tion in an article on self-determination, Lenin draws the following 
conclusion: “Marx had no doubt as to the subordinate position 
of the national question as compared with the labor question.’ ” 77 

Here are only two lines, but they are decisive. And this is what 
some of our comrades who are more zealous than wise should drill 
into their heads. 

The second question is that of Great-Russian chauvinism and 
local chauvinism. Comrade Rakovsky, and especially Comrade 
Bukharin, have come forward here and proposed that the point 
dealing with the danger of local chauvinism should be deleted. 
Their argument is that there is no need to bother with such a 
pigmy as local chauvinism when we have such a Goliath as Great- 
Russian chauvinism. Generally, Comrade Bukharin was in a re- 
pentant mood. That is natural: he has been sinning for years 
against the nationalities, denying the right of self-determination. 
It is high time to repent. But in repenting he went to the other 
extreme. It is a curious thing that Comrade Bukharin should call 
upon the party to follow his example and repent, when it is com- 
mon knowledge that the party is in no way implicated: for it has 
from its very inception (1898) recognized the right of self-deter- 
mination and therefore has nothing to repent. The point is that 
Comrade Bukharin has not understood the real meaning of the 
national question. When it is said that the most important thing 
in the national question is to fight Great-Russian chauvinism, this 
indicates what the duties of a Russian Communist are; it implies 
that it is the duty of every Russian Communist himself to wage war 
on Russian chauvinism. If the fight against Russian chauvinism 
were undertaken not by the Russian but by the Turkestanian or 
Georgian Communists, it would be interpreted as anti-Russian 
chauvinism. This would confuse everything and strengthen Great- 
Russian chauvinism. Only the Russian Communists can undertake 
the war on Great-Russian chauvinism and fight it to a finish. 

And what is implied when a war on local anti-Russian chauvin- 
ism is proposed? It implies the duty of local Communists, the duty 
of non-Russian Communists, to resist their own chauvinists. Can 



l6o MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

one deny the existence of deviations towards anti-Russian chau- 
vinism? Why, the whole congress has seen for itself that local > 
Georgian, Bashkir, and other kinds of chauvinism exist and that 
they must be combated. 

Russian Communists cannot combat Tatar, Georgian, or Bashkir 
chauvinism; for if a Russian Communist were to undertake the 
difficult task of fighting Tatar or Georgian chauvinism it would 
be regarded as the fight of a Great-Russian chauvinist against the 
Tatars or the Georgians. This would confuse the whole issue. 
Only the Tatar, Georgian, and other Communists can fight Tatar, 
Georgian and other chauvinism, only the Georgian Communists 
can successfully combat Georgian nationalism or chauvinism. 
That is the duty of the non-Russian Communists. That is why it 
is necessary to refer in the theses to this dual task, that of the 
Russian Communists (I refer to the fight against Great-Russian 
chauvinism) and that of the non-Russian Communists (I refer 
to the fight against anti-Armenian, anti-Tatar, anti-Russian chau- 
vinism). Otherwise the theses will be one-sided, otherwise we 
shall not create internationalism either in state or in party develop- 
ment. 

If we fight only against Great-Russian chauvinism, this fight will 
obscure the fight of the Tatar and other chauvinists which is devel- 
oping in the localities and which is especially dangerous now, 
under the conditions of the New Economic Policy. We cannot re- 
frain from waging a fight on two fronts, for only by fighting on two 
fronts — on the one hand against Great-Russian chauvinism, which 
forms the chief danger in our work of construction, and on the 
other hand against local chauvinism — can we achieve success; for 
without this dual fight there can be no alliance between the Rus- 
sian workers and peasants and the workers and peasants of other 
nationalities. If this fight is not waged, the result may be to foster 
local chauvinism; it may lead to a policy of encouraging local 
chauvinism, which we cannot allow. 

Permit me here too to quote Comrade Lenin. I would not have 
done so, but since at our congress there are many comrades who 



REPORT ON NATIONAL FACTORS IN PARTY AND STATE l6l 

quote Comrade Lenin all awry, and distort him, permit me to read 
a few words from one well-known article by Comrade Lenin: 

The proletariat must demand the right of political secession for 
the colonies and for the nations that “its own” nation oppresses. 
Unless it does this, proletarian internationalism will remain a mean- 
ingless phrase; mutual confidence and class solidarity between the 
workers of the oppressing and oppressed nations will be impos- 
sible . 78 

These are, as it were, the duties of the proletarians of the ruling 
or formerly ruling nation. Then he goes on to speak of the duties 
of the proletarians or the Communists of the formerly oppressed 
muons: 

The Socialists of the oppressed nations, on the other hand, must 
particularly fight for and maintain complete and absolute unity, 
including organizational unity, between the workers of the op- 
pressed nation and the ^workers of the oppressing nation. Without 
such unity it will be impossible to maintain an independent pro- 
letarian policy and class solidarity with the proletariat of other 
countries in the face of all the subterfuge, treachery, and trickery 
of the bourgeoisie; for the bourgeoisie of the oppressed nations are 
constandy converting the slogans of national liberation into a means 
for deceiving the workers. 79 

As you see, if one is to follow in the footsteps of Comrade Lenin 
— and some comrades here have sworn by him— both theses must 
be retained in the resolution — the thesis on combating Great- 
Russian chauvinism and the thesis on combating local chauvinism 
— as being two aspects of one phenomenon, as being dieses on 
combating chauvinism in general. 

This concludes my objections to what has been said by the speak- 
ers here. 

From a report delivered at the Twelfth Congress of 
the Russian Communist Party, April 23, 1923. 



Rights and “Lefts” in the National Republics 
and Regions 


I take the floor in order to make a few comments on the speeches 
made by comrades here. As regards the principles involved in the 
case of Sultan-Galiyev, I shall endeavor to deal with them in my 
report on the second item on the agenda. 

First of all, with regard to the conference itself. Someone (I for- 
get whom) said that this conference is an unusual event. That is 
not so. Such conferences are not a novelty for our party. The pres- 
ent conference is the fourth of its kind since the establishment of 
the Soviet government. Before 1919 there were three such confer- 
ences. Conditions at that time permitted us to call such conferences. 
But subsequently, after 1919, during the years 1920 and 1921, when 
we were entirely absorbed in the Civil War, there was no time 
for conferences of this kind. And only now that we have put an 
end to the Civil War, now that our work in the sphere of economic 
construction has assumed a more profound character, now that 
party work itself has become more concrete, especially in the na- 
tional regions and republics, has it once more become possible to 
call conferences of this kind. I think the Central Committee will 
frequently resort to this method of establishing closer mutual 
understanding between those who are carrying out the policy in 
the localities and those who are making that policy. I think that 
such conferences should be called, representing not only all the 
republics and regions, conferences which to a certain extent are 
all-embracing (for, at them, it is possible to decide only questions 
of a more or less general nature) , but also conferences on individual 
regions and republics in order to draw up more concrete decisions. 
This alone is capable of satisfying both the Central Committee and 
the responsible workers in the localities. 



RIGHTS AND “LEFTS” IN THE NATIONAL REPUBLICS 1 63 

I have heard certain comrades say that I warned Sultan-Galiyev, 
that I had the opportunity of acquainting myself with his first secret 
letter, addressed, I think, to Adigamov, who for some reason is 
silent and has not uttered a word here, although it is he who should 
primarily have spoken and who should have spoken rather than 
anyone else. I have been reproached by these comrades with having 
defended Sultan-Galiyev excessively. Yes, it is true that I defended 
him as long as it was possible, and I considered and still consider 
that it was my duty to do so. But I defended him only up to a 
certain limit. And when Sultan-Galiyev went beyond that limit I 
turned my back on him. His first secret letter shows that he was 
already breaking with the party, because the tone of his letter is 
almost Whiteguard; for he writes of members of the Central Com- 
mittee as one can write only of enemies. I met him by chance in 
the Political Bureau, where he was defending the demands of the 
Tatar Republic in connection with the People’s Commissariat of 
Agriculture. I warned him then, handing him a note in which I 
said that his secret letter was of an anti-party character and accused 
him of creating an organization of the Validov type; and I told 
him that unless he desisted from illegal, anti-party work he would 
come to a bad end and any support on my part would be out of the 
question. He replied in great embarrassment that I had been mis- 
led, that he had indeed written to Adigamov, but had written not 
that, but something else, that he remained the party man he had 
always been and gave his word of honor that he would remain so 
in the future. 

Nevertheless, a week later he sent a second secret letter instruct- 
ing Adigamov to establish contacts with the Basmachi and their 
leader Validov, and to “burn” the letter. The whole thing was 
vile, it was sheer deception, and compelled me to break off all con- 
nections with Sultan-Galiyev. From that moment, for me Sultan- 
Galiyev became a man outside the party, outside the Soviets, and 
I did not consider it possible to speak to him, although he tried 
several times to come in and “have a talk” with me. Such are the 
facts. As far back as the beginning of 1919 the “Left” comrades 



164 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

reproached me for supporting Sultan-Galiyev, for trying to save 
him for the party, for sparing him in the hope that he would cease 
to be a nationalist and become a Marxist. And, indeed, I considered 
it my duty to support him for a certain time. There are so few 
Intellectuals, so few thinking people, even so few literate people 
generally in the Eastern republics and regions that one can count 
them on one’s fingers. How can one help setting store by them? 
It would be criminal not to take every measure to save from cor- 
ruption people of the East whom we need and to preserve them 
for the party. But there is a limit to everything. And the limit in 
this case was reached when Sultan-Galiyev passed from the camp 
of the Communists to the camp of the Basmachi. From that time 
on he ceased to exist for the party. That is why he found the 
Turkish ambassador more acceptable than the Central Committee 
of our party. 

I have heard a similar reproach from Comrade Shamigulov, to 
the effect that, in spite of his insistence that we should finish with 
Validov at a single blow, I defended Validov and tried to preserve 
him for the party. It is true that I defended him in the hope that 
Validov might reform. Worse people have reformed, as we know 
from the history of political parties. I decided that Shamigulov’s 
solution of the problem was too simple. I did not follow his advice. 
It is true that within a year Shamigulov’s prediction was borne out. 
Validov did not reform, he went over to the Basmachi. Neverthe- 
less, the party gained by the fact that we kept Validov for a year 
from leaving the party. If we had settled with Validov in 1918, 
I am certain that comrades like Murtazin, Adigamov, Khalikov 
and others would not have remained in our ranks. 

[Voice: “Khalikov would have remained ”] 

Khalikov perhaps would not have left us, but a whole group of 
comrades working in our ranks would have left together with 
Validov. That is what we gained by our tolerance and foresight. 

I listened to Comrade Ryskulov, and I must say that his speech 
was not altogether sincere, it was semi-diplomatic [Voice: “Hear, 
hear!"], and generally his speech produced a depressing effect on 



eights and “lefts” in the national republics 165 

me. I expected more clarity and sincerity from him. Whatever 
Comrade Ryskuiov may say, it is clear that he has at home two 
secret letters from Sultan-Galiyev which he has shown to no one; 
it is clear that he was associated with Sultan-Galiyev ideologically. 
The fact that Ryskuiov dissociates himself from the case of Sultan- 
Galiyev in the criminal aspect of the matter, maintaining that he 
is not involved with Sultan-Galiyev in the course that leads to the 
Basmachl, means nothing. That is not what we are talking about 
at this conference. What we are talking about is the intellectual 
and ideological ties with Sultan-Galiyevism. And that such ties did 
exist between Comrade Ryskuiov and Sultan-Galiyev is clear, com- 
rades, and even Comrade Ryskuiov himself cannot deny it. And 
is it not high time for him here, from this tribune, to dissociate 
himself finally and irrevocably from Sultan-Galiyevism? In this 
respect Comrade Ryskulov’s speech was semi-diplomatic and 
unsatisfactory. 

Comrade Enbayev also made a diplomatic and insincere speech. 
Is it not a fact that Comrade Enbayev and a group of other Tatar 
workers, whom I consider splendid practical workers in spite of 
their lack of ideological stamina, after Sultan-Galiyev’s arrest ad- 
dressed a demand to the Central Committee for his immediate 
release, vouching unreservedly for him and hinting that the docu- 
ments found in Sultan-Galiyev’s possession were not authentic? Is 
that not a fact? What, however, was revealed by the investigation? 
It was revealed that all the documents were authentic. Their au- 
thenticity was admitted by Sultan-Galiyev himself, who in fact 
gave more information regarding his sins than is contained in the 
documents, and confessed his guilt fully, without concealment, 
and, having confessed, repented. After all this, is it not obvious that 
Comrade Enbayev should have admitted his error and dissociated 
himself from Sultan-Galiyev finally and irrevocably? But this 
Comrade Enbayev did not do. He found occasion to ridicule the 
“Lefts,” but would not dissociate himself definitely, like a Com- 
munist, from the ideas of Sultan-Galiyev, from the abyss in which 



1 66 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Sultan-Galiyev landed; he evidently expected that diplomacy 
would save him. 

The speech of Comrade Firdevs was diplomacy from beginning 
to end. Who led whom ideologically— Sultan-Galiyev Firdevs, or 
Firdevs Sultan-Galiyev — is a question I leave open. In my opinion, 
however, Firdevs led Sultan-Galiyev ideologically rather than the 
other way round. I see nothing particularly reprehensible In 
Sultan-Gaiiyev’s exercises in theory. If Sultan-Galiyev had confined 
himself to the Ideology of Pan-Turkism and Pan-Islamism, it 
would not have been so bad. I would have said that this ideology 
might be tolerated in spite of the veto laid on it by the resolution 
of the Tenth Congress of the party on the national question, and 
that we might confine ourselves to criticizing it within the ranks 
of our party. But when exercises in ideology end in the establish- 
ment of contacts with leaders of the Basmachi, with Validov and 
others, it becomes absolutely impossible to justify Basmach prac- 
tice on the grounds of an innocent ideology, as Comrade Firdevs 
tries to do. You can deceive nobody by such a justification of 
Sultan-Galiyev’s activities. It is possible in this way to justify impe- 
rialism and tsarism, for they also have their ideologies, which often 
look innocent enough. One cannot reason in this way. You are 
not facing a tribunal, but a conference of responsible workers, who 
demand of you straightforwardness and sincerity, and not diplo- 
macy. 

Comrade Khodzhanov spoke well, in my opinion, and Comrade 
Ikramov also did not speak badly. But I must mention a point in 
the speeches of these comrades which gives food for thought. 
They both said that there is no difference between present-day 
Turkestan and tsarist Turkestan, that only the signboard has been 
changed, that Turkestan has remained as it was under the tsar. 
Comrades, if this is not a slip, if this is a considered speech and 
was said deliberately, it must be said that the Basmachi are right 
and we are wrong. If Turkestan is really a colony, as it was under 
tsarism, then the Basmachi are right, and it is not we who should 
be trying Sultan-Galiyev, but Sultan-Galiyev who should be trying 



RIGHTS AND “LEFTS” IN THE NATIONAL REPUBLICS l6j 

us for tolerating the existence o£ a colony under the Soviet govern- 
ment. If that is so, I fail to understand why you have not gone 
over to the Basmachi yourselves. Evidently, Comrades Khodz- 
hanov and Ikramov have not thought over this passage in their 
speeches, for they cannot help knowing that present-day Soviet 
Turkestan radically differs from tsarist Turkestan. I wanted to 
point out this obscure passage in the speeches of these comrades 
in order that the comrades should try to think this matter over and 
rectify their mistake. 

I take upon myself certain of the charges brought by Comrade 
Ikramov against the work of the Central Committee to the effect 
that we were not always attentive and did not always succeed in 
raising in time the practical questions dictated by the situation in 
the Eastern republics and regions. Of course, the Central Commit- 
tee is overburdened with work and is not in a position to attend 
to everything. It would be ridiculous to think that the Central 
Committee can do everything in time. Of course, there are not 
enough schools in Turkestan. The use of the local languages has 
not yet become the practice in the state institutions, the institutions 
have not been naturalized. Culture in general is at a low level. 
All this is true. But can it seriously be hoped that the Central Com- 
mittee or the party as a whole can raise the cultural level of Tur- 
kestan in two or three years? We are all shouting and complaining 
that Russian culture, the culture of the Russian people, which is 
more cultured than the other peoples of the Union of Republics, 
is at a low level. Ilyich [Lenin] is always crying that we have no 
culture yet, that there is no possibility of raising Russian culture 
appreciably in two or three, or even ten years. And if it is impos- 
sible to raise Russian culture in two or three, or even ten years, 
how can we demand a rapid rise in culture in the non-Russian, 
backward, semi-literate regions? Is it not clear that nine-tenths of 
the “fault” lies with the circumstances of the situation, the back- 
wardness, and, as the phrase is, nothing can be done about it? 

About the “Lefts” and the Rights. Do they exist in the Com- 



1 68 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

munist organizations in the regions and republics. Of course they 
do. That is undeniable. 

Where do the Rights sin? In that they are not and cannot be an 
antidote to, a reliable bulwark against, the nationalist tendencies 
which are developing and becoming accentuated in connection 
with the New Economic Policy. The fact that the Sultan-Galiyev 
affair did occur, that it created a certain circle of supporters in the 
Eastern republics, especially in the Bashkir and Tatar Republics, 
leaves no doubt that the Right elements, which in these republics 
comprise an overwhelming majority, are not a sufficiently strong 
bulwark against nationalism. It should be borne in mind that our 
Communist organizations in the border districts, in the republics 
and regions, can develop and firmly establish themselves, can be- 
come genuine internationalist, Marxist cadres, only if they get rid 
of their nationalism. Nationalism is the chief ideological obstacle 
to the training of Marxist cadres, of a Marxist vanguard in the 
border regions and republics. The history of our party has shown 
that the Bolshevik Party, as far as its Russian members were con- 
cerned, grew and gained strength in the fight against Menshevism; 
for Menshevism is an ideology of the bourgeoisie, Menshevism is 
a channel for the penetration of bourgeois ideology into our party, 
and without overcoming Menshevism the party could not have 
become firmly established. Ilyich has written about this repeatedly. 
Only as Bolshevism overcame Menshevism in its organizational 
and ideological forms did it grow and become consolidated as a 
real leading party. 

The same must be said of nationalism in relation to our Com- 
munist organizations in the border regions and republics. In rela- 
tion to these organizations nationalism is playing the same part as 
Menshevism played in the past in relation to the party of the 
Bolsheviks. Only under cover of nationalism can various kinds 
of bourgeois, including Menshevik, influences penetrate into our 
organizations in the border regions. Our organizations in the 
republics can become Marxist cadres only if they are able to with- 
stand the nationalist ideas which are pushing their way into our 



RIGHTS AND “LEFTS” IN THE NATIONAL REPUBLICS 1 69 

party in the border regions, which are pushing their way into our 
party because the bourgeoisie is reviving, the New Economic 
Policy is spreading, nationalism is growing; because there are still 
survivals of Great-Russian chauvinism, which also tend to develop 
local nationalism, and because there is the influence of foreign 
states, which are fostering nationalism in every way. The fight 
against this enemy in the republics and regions represents a stage 
through which our Communist organizations in the national 
republics must pass if they want to grow in strength as genuinely 
Marxist organizations. There is no other way. And in this fight 
the Rights are weak. They are weak because they are infected with 
skepticism with regard to the party and easily succumb to the 
influence of nationalism. That is the sin of the Right wing of the 
Communist organizations in the republics and regions. 

But no less, if not greater, is the sin of the “Lefts” in the border 
regions. While the Communist organizations in the border regions 
cannot grow strong and develop into genuinely Marxist cadres 
without ridding themselves of nationalism, these cadres themselves 
can become mass organizations, can rally the majority of the toiling 
masses around them, only if they learn to be sufficiently flexible 
to be able to draw into our state institutions all in-any-way reliable 
national elements by making concessions to them; and if they 
learn to combine a resolute fight against nationalism in the party 
with as resolute a fight in drawing into Soviet work all more or 
less reliable elements among the local people, the intelligentsia, 
and so on. 

The “Lefts” in the border regions are more or less free of a skep- 
tical attitude towards the party, of a tendency to succumb to 
nationalism. But the sins of the “Lefts” lie in the fact that they 
show no flexibility in relation to the bourgeois-democratic and 
merely reliable elements of the population, that they are unable 
and unwilling to maneuver in order to secure the co-operation of 
these elements, that they distort the line of the party in the matter 
of gaining the support of the majority of the toiling population in 
the country. Yet this flexibility and ability to combine the fight 



I JO MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

against nationalism with the task o£ drawing all in-any-way reliable 
elements into our state institutions must be created and developed 
at all costs. It can be created and developed only if we take into 
account all the complexity and the specific nature of the situation 
prevailing in our regions and republics; if we do not simply engage 
in transplanting the models that are being created in the central 
districts, which cannot be transplanted mechanically to the border 
regions; if we do not ignore the nationalistically inclined elements 
of the population, the nationalistically inclined petty bourgeois, 
and if we learn to draw these elements into the general work of the 
state. The sin of the “Lefts” is that they do not understand the 
first-rate importance of these complex party tasks. 

While the Rights create the danger that by their tendency to 
succumb to nationalism they may hinder the growth of our Com- 
munist cadres in the border regions, the “Lefts” create the danger 
that by their enthusiasm for an oversimplified and quick-fire “com- 
munism” they may isolate our party from the peasantry and from 
the broad strata of the local population. 

Which of these dangers is the more dangerous? If the comrades 
who deviate towards the “Left” intend to continue practicing in the 
localities their policy of artificially splitting the population — a pol- 
icy which was practiced not only in Chechnya and the Yakut 
Region, and not only in Turkestan . . . [Ibragimov: “They are 
tactics of differentiation”] — Comrade Ibragimov has just thought 
of calling the tactics of splitting the population tactics of differen- 
tiation, but that changes nothing — if, I repeat, they intend to con- 
tinue practicing their policy of splitting the population from above; 
if they think that Russian models can be transplanted to a specifi- 
cally national milieu without regard for the customs of the popu- 
lation and for the concrete conditions; if they think that in fighting 
nationalism everything that is national must be thrown overboard; 
in a word, if the “Left” Communists in the border regions intend 
to remain incorrigible, I must say that of the two the “Left” danger 
may prove to be the more dangerous danger. 

That is all I wanted to say about the “Lefts” and the Rights. I 



RIGHTS AND “LEFTS” IN THE NATIONAL REPUBLICS 171 

have run ahead somewhat, but that Is because the whole conference 
has run ahead and anticipated the discussion of the second Item. 

We must whip up the Rights In order to make them, In order 
to teach them, to fight nationalism, so as to forge real Communist 
cadres from among the local people. But we must also lash the 
“Lefts” In order to teach them to be flexible and to maneuver skill- 
fully, so as to win over the broad masses of the population. All this 
is essential because, as Comrade Khodzhanov correctly remarked, 
the truth lies “between the two,” between the Rights and the 
“Lefts.” 

Speech delivered at the Fourth Conference of the 
Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party 
with representatives from the National Republics and 
Regions, June io, 1923. 



Training Cadres in the National Republics 
and Regions 


... I now pass to the methods o£ training and consolidating 
Marxists cadres from among local people, cadres which may serve 
as an important and, in the long run, decisive bulwark of the 
Soviet government in the border regions and the national repub- 
lics. If we examine the development of our party (I take its Rus- 
sian section, the main section) and follow the principal stages in 
its development, and in an analogous way construct a picture of 
the development of our Communist organizations for the im- 
mediate future in the regions and republics, I think we shall find 
the key to the specific features which in these countries distinguish 
the development of our party in the border regions. 

The principal task in the first period of development of our 
party, of its Russian section, was to create cadres, Marxist cadres. 
These Marxist cadres were manufactured, forged, in our fight 
with Menshevism. The task of these cadres then, at that period — 
I am referring to the period from the foundation of the Bol- 
shevik Party to the expulsion from the party of the Liquidators, 
the most finished representatives of Menshevism — the main task 
was to win for the Bolsheviks the most active, honest, and out- 
standing members of the working class, to create cadres, to forge 
a vanguard. In this respect, the struggle was waged primarily 
against tendencies of a bourgeois character — especially against 
Menshevism — which hindered the formation of cadres and their 
fusion into a single unit, as the core of the party. At that time it 
was still not the immediate and urgent task of the party to estab- 
lish extensive connections with the vast masses of the working 
class and the toiling peasantry, to gain control over these masses, 

172 



TRAINING CADRES IN THE NATIONAL REPUBLICS 1 73 

to win a majority in the country. The party was not yet mature 
enough for that. 

Only in the following stage of development of our party* only 
in its second stage, when these cadres had grown, when they had 
become the core of our party, when the sympathies of the best ele- 
ments among the working class had already been won, or almost 
won — only then did it become an immediate and urgent task of 
the party to win over the masses, to transform the party cadres 
into a real mass workers’ party. During this period the core of 
our party was compelled to combat not Menshevism so much as 
the “Left” elements within the party, the “Otzovists” of all kinds, 
who were attempting to substitute revolutionary phraseology for 
a serious study of the distinctive features of the new situation 
which arose after 1905, who by their oversimplified “revolution- 
ary” tactics were impeding the conversion of the cadres of our 
party into a genuine mass party, who by their activities were cre- 
ating the danger of the party becoming divorced from the broad 
working-class masses. It need hardly be shown that had the party 
not resolutely combated this “Left” danger, had the party not 
overcome this danger, it could not have gained control over the 
vast toiling masses. 

Such, roughly, is the picture of the fight on two fronts, against 
the Rights and the “Lefts,” the picture of the development of the 
principal section of our party, the Russian section. 

Comrade Lenin very convincingly portrayed this essential and 
inevitable development of Communist parties in his pamphlet 
“Left-Wing” Communism , an Infantile Disorder . Comrade Lenin 
there proved that the Communist parties in the West must pass 
and are already passing through approximately the same stages of 
development. We will add that the same must be said of the de- 
velopment of our Communist organizations and Communist 
parties in the border regions. 

It should, however, be noted that, despite the analogy between 
what the party experienced in the past and what our party organ- 
izations in the border regions are experiencing now, there are cer- 



174 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

tain important specific features in the development of our party in 
the national republics and regions for which we must, under all 
circumstances, make careful provision, for otherwise we shall risk 
committing a number of gross errors in defining the tasks of train- 
ing Marxist cadres from among local people in the border regions. 

Let us now examine these specific features. 

The fight against the Right and “Left” elements in our organ- 
izations in the border regions is necessary and essential, for other- 
wise we shall not be able to train Marxist cadres which are closely 
connected with the masses. That is clear. But the specific feature 
of the situation in the border regions, the feature that distinguishes 
it from the past development of our party, is that the forging of 
cadres and their conversion into a mass party is taking place in 
the border regions not under a bourgeois system, as was the case 
in the history of our party, but under a Soviet system, under the 
dictatorship of the proletariat. At that time, under the bourgeois 
system, it was possible and necessary, in accordance with the con- 
ditions of the times, to flay first the Mensheviks (in order to forge 
Marxist cadres) and then the Otzovists (in order to turn these 
cadres into a mass party), and the fight against these two devi- 
ations filled two entire periods in the history of our party. 

Now, in accordance with present conditions, we cannot do this, 
for now the party is in power, and being in power the party needs, 
in the border regions, dependable Marxists cadres from among 
local people who are at the same time connected with the broad 
masses of the population. Now we cannot first beat the Rights 
with the help of the “Lefts,” as was the case in the history of our 
party, and then beat the “Lefts” with the help of the Rights. We 
must now wage a fight on both fronts simultaneously and strive 
to overcome both dangers, so as to have cadres of local people in 
the border regions schooled in Marxism and connected with the 
masses. At that time we could speak of cadres which were not as 
yet connected with the masses and which were to become con- 
nected with them in the following stage of development. Now it 
is ridiculous even to speak of this, because under a Soviet govern- 



TRAINING CADRES IN THE NATIONAL REPUBLICS 1 75 

ment, for Marxist cadres, not to be connected with the masses, 
would mean the collapse of the Soviet government. They would 
be cadres altogether alien both to Marxism and to a mass party. 
All this considerably complicates matters and dictates to our party 
organizations in the border regions the need for a simultaneous 
struggle against both the Rights and the “Lefts ” This explains 
the position of our party, which is fighting on two fronts, against 
both deviations simultaneously. 

It should further be noted that the development of our Com- 
munist organizations in the border regions is not proceeding in 
isolation, as was the case in the history of our party in relation to 
its Russian section, but under the immediate influence of the core 
of our party, which is experienced not only in forming Marxist 
cadres, but also in connecting these cadres with the broad masses 
of the population and in revolutionary maneuvering in the fight 
for Soviet government. The specific feature of the situation in the 
border regions in this respect is that our party organizations in 
these countries, owing to the conditions of development of Soviet 
government in these regions, can and must manipulate their 
forces for the purpose of strengthening their connections with the 
broad masses of the population, utilizing for this purpose the rich 
store of experience accumulated by our party in the past. Until 
recently the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party 
itself usually did the maneuvering in the border regions, over the 
heads of the party organizations in the border regions, sometimes 
even in spite of these organizations, drawing all in-any-way re- 
liable national elements into the general work of Soviet construc- 
tion. Now this work must be performed by the organizations in 
the border regions themselves. They can do it, and must do it, 
remembering that this is the best way of converting the Marxist 
cadres from among the local people into a genuine mass party 
capable of leading the majority of the population of the country. 

These are the two specific features which must be strictly borne 
in mind in determining the line of our party in the border regions, 



176 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

in the work of training Marxist cadres and in the work of these 
cadres in winning over the broad masses of the population. 

From a report delivered at the Fourth Conference 
of the Central Committee of the Russian Com- 
munist Party with representatives from the National 
Republics and Regions, June 10, 1923. 



The October Revolution and the Problem 
of the Middle Strata 


The problem of the middle strata is undoubtedly one of the 
fundamental problems of a workers' revolution. The middle strata 
are made up of the peasantry and the petty toiling population of 
the towns. Under this category must also be classed the oppressed 
nationalities, nine-tenths of which consist of middle strata. As you 
see, these are the strata which, according to their economic posi- 
tion, stand midway between the proletariat and the capitalist class. 
The relative importance of these strata is due to two circum- 
stances: in the first place, these strata represent a majority, or, at 
any rate, a considerable minority of the population of the existing 
states; in the second place, they constitute the important reserves 
from which the capitalist class recruits its army against the pro- 
letariat. The proletariat cannot maintain power unless it enjoys the 
sympathy and support of the middle strata, primarily of the 
peasantry, especially in a country like our Union of Republics. The 
proletariat cannot even seriously contemplate seizing power unless 
these strata have at least been neutralized, unless these strata have 
already become divorced from the capitalist class and unless in 
their mass they no longer constitute an army of capital. Hence the 
fight for the middle strata, the fight for the peasantry, which ran 
like a crimson thread through the whole of our revolution, from 
1905 to 1917, a fight which is still far from ended and which will 
continue to be fought in the future. 

One of the reasons for the defeat of the Revolution of 1848 in 
France was that it failed to evoke a sympathetic response among 
the French peasantry. One of the reasons for the fall of the Paris 
Commune was that it encountered the opposition of the middle 
strata, especially of the peasantry. The same must be said of the 



178 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Russian Revolution of 1905. Certain vulgar Marxists, chief among 
them Kautsky, basing themselves on the experience of European 
revolutions, have come to the conclusion that the middle strata, 
especially the peasantry, are almost the natural enemies of the 
workers’ revolution; that therefore a more lengthy period of devel- 
opment must be contemplated, as a result of which the proletariat 
will become the majority of the nation and thereby the proper con- 
ditions will be created for the victory of the workers’ revolution. 
On the basis of this conclusion, they, the vulgar Marxists, warned 
the proletariat against “premature” revolution. On the basis of this 
conclusion, they, from “motives of principle,” left the middle strata 
to the complete sway of capital. On the basis of this conclusion, 
they prophesied the doom of the Russian October Revolution, on 
the grounds that the proletariat in Russia constitutes a minority, 
that Russia is a peasant country and that therefore a victorious 
workers’ revolution in Russia is impossible. 

It is noteworthy that Marx himself had an entirely different 
opinion of the middle strata, especially the peasantry. Whereas the 
vulgar Marxists, having washed their hands of the peasantry and 
surrendered them to the complete political sway of capital, noisily 
bragged of their “consistency of principle,” Marx, the most con- 
sistent in principle of all Marxists, urgently advised the Party of 
the Communists not to lose sight of the peasants, to win them over 
to the side of the proletariat and to make sure of their support in 
the coming proletarian revolution. We know that in the fifties, 
after the defeat of the February Revolution in France and in 
Germany, Marx wrote to Engels, and through him to the Com- 
munist Party of Germany, saying: “The whole thing in Germany 
will depend on the possibility of covering the rear of the pro- 
letarian revolution by a second edition of the Peasants’ War.” 80 

This was written in reference to the Germany of the fifties, a 
peasant country, in which the proletariat comprised an insignifi- 
cant minority, in which the proletariat was less organized than 
the proletariat of Russia in 1917, and in which the peasantry, be- 



OCTOBER REVOLUTION AND THE MIDDLE STRATA 1 79 

cause of Its status* was less disposed to support a proletarian revo- 
lution than was the case in Russia in 1917. 

The “highly-principled” chatterboxes notwithstanding, the 
October Revolution undoubtedly presented that happy combina- 
tion of a “peasant war” and a “proletarian revolution” of which 
Marx wrote. The October Revolution proved that such a com- 
bination is both possible and feasible. The October Revolution 
proved that the proletariat can seize power and retain It, provided 
it is able to sever the middle strata, especially the peasantry, from 
the capitalist class and provided it is able to convert these strata 
from reserves of capital into reserves of the proletariat. 

In brief, the October Revolution was the first of all the revolu- 
tions in the world to give prominence to the problem of the middle 
strata, and primarily of the peasantry, and the first to solve it suc- 
cessfully, despite the “theories” and jeremiads of the heroes of the 
Second International. 

This is the first merit of the October Revolution, if one may 
speak of merit at all in such a connection. 

Rut the matter did not stop there. The October Revolution went 
further and tried to rally the oppressed nationalities around the 
proletariat. It has already been said that nine-tenths of these na- 
tionalities consist of peasants and of the petty toiling population of 
the towns. This, however, does not exhaust the concept “op- 
pressed nationality.” Oppressed nationalities are usually oppressed 
not only as peasants and as urban toiling populations, but also as 
nationalities — as the toilers of a definite state, language, culture, 
manner of life, customs, and habits. The double burden of op- 
pression cannot but tend to revolutionize the toiling masses of the 
oppressed nationalities, cannot but drive them to fight the prin- 
cipal force of oppression — capital. This circumstance was the 
basis on which the proletariat managed to achieve a combination 
of the “proletarian revolution” not only with a “peasant war” 
but also with a “national war ” All this could not fail to extend 
the field of action of the proletarian revolution far beyond the 
confines of Russia; it could not fail to jeopardize the most deep- 



l8o MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

seated reserves of capital. If the fight for the middle strata of a 
given dominant nationality is a fight for the direct reserves of 
capital, the fight for the emancipation of the oppressed nation- 
alities could not but be transformed into a fight for certain of the 
most deep-seated reserves of capital, into a fight for the emanci- 
pation of the colonial and non-sovereign nations from the yoke of 
capital. This latter fight is still far from ended — more, it has not 
yet yielded even the first decisive successes. But this fight for 
the deep-seated reserves was started by the October Revolution, 
and it will undoubtedly unfold itself step by step with the develop- 
ment of imperialism, the growing power of our Union of Repub- 
lics and the development of the proletarian revolution in the 
West. 

In brief, the October Revolution in fact started the fight of the 
proletariat for the deep-seated reserves of capitalism among the 
masses of the oppressed and non-sovereign countries; it was the 
first to raise the standard of war for the conquest of these re- 
serves. That is its second merit. 

The winning of the peasantry in our country was effected under 
the banner of socialism. The peasantry, having received land from 
the proletariat, having defeated the landlords with the aid of the 
proletariat, and having risen to power under the leadership of the 
proletariat, could not but feel, could not but realize, that the 
process of its emancipation was proceeding, and would continue to 
proceed, under the banner of the proletariat, under its red banner. 
This circumstance could not but convert the banner of socialism, 
which had formerly been a bogey to the peasantry, into a banner 
which claimed its attention and aided its emancipation from its 
down-trodden condition, its destitution and oppression. The same 
is true, but to an even greater degree, of the oppressed nationalities. 
The call to fight for the emancipation of the nationalities, a call 
backed by such facts as the liberation of Finland, the evacuation 
of troops from Persia and China, the formation of the Union of 
Republics, the moral support openly given to the peoples of 



OCTOBER REVOLUTION AND THE MIDDLE STRATA l8l 

Turkey, China, Hindustan, Egypt— this call was first sounded by 
the people who were the victors in the October Revolution. 

The fact that Russia, which formerly served as a symbol of 
oppression in the eyes of the oppressed nationalities, has now, 
after it has become socialist, been transformed into a symbol of 
emancipation cannot be said to be a mere chance. Nor is it a mere 
chance that the name of the leader of the October Revolution, 
Comrade Lenin, is now a name cherished by the downtrodden, 
browbeaten peasants and revolutionary intelligentsia of the colo- 
nial and non-sovereign countries. If Christianity was formerly 
regarded by the oppressed and down-trodden slaves of the vast 
Roman Empire as a rock of salvation, we are now reaching a point 
where socialism may serve (and is already beginning to serve) as 
a banner of liberation for the millions of the vast colonial states 
of imperialism. It can hardly be doubted that this circumstance 
served considerably to facilitate the fight against the prejudices to 
socialism, and to open the way for the ideas of socialism in the 
most remote corners of the oppressed countries. If formerly it was 
difficult for a Socialist to show himself with open visor among 
the non-proletarian middle strata of the oppressed or oppressor 
countries, today he can openly come forward and advocate the 
ideas of socialism among these strata and expect to be listened to, 
ay, and even hearkened to; for he is backed by so cogent an ar- 
gument as the October Revolution. This also is a result of the 
October Revolution. 

In brief, the October Revolution has cleared a path for the 
penetration of the ideas of socialism to the middle, non-prole- 
tarian, peasant strata of all nationalities and tribes; it has made 
the banner of socialism a popular banner among them — that is 
the third merit of the October Revolution. 


Pravda, No. 253, November 7, 1923. 



The National Question 


From this theme I take the two main questions: (a) the pres- 
entation o£ the problem; (b) the liberation movement of the 
oppressed peoples and the proletarian revolution. 

i. THE PRESENTATION OF THE PROBLEM 

During the last twenty years the national problem has under- 
gone a number of very important changes. The national problem 
in the period of the Second International and the national problem 
in the period of Leninism are far from being the same thing. They 
differ profoundly from each other, not only in their scope, but also 
In their intrinsic character. 

Formerly, the national problem was usually confined to a nar- 
row circle of questions, concerning, primarily, “cultured” nation- 
alities. The Irish, the Hungarians, the Poles, the Finns, the Serbs, 
and several other European nationalities— that was the circle 
of disfranchised peoples in whose destinies the heroes of the 
Second International were interested. The scores and hundreds 
of millions of Asiatic and African peoples who are suffering na- 
tional oppression in its most savage and cruel form usually re- 
mained outside of their field of vision. They hesitated to put white 
and black, “civilized” and “uncivilized,” on the same plane. Two 
or three meaningless, lukewarm resolutions, which carefully 
evaded the question of liberating the colonies — that was all the 
leaders of the Second International could boast of. Now we can 
say that this duplicity and half-heartedness in dealing with the 
national problem has been brought to an end. Leninism laid bare 
this crying incongruity, broke down the wall between whites and 



THE NATIONAL QUESTION 1 83 

blacks, between Europeans and Asiatics, between the “civilized” 
and “uncivilized” slaves of imperialism, and thus linked the na- 
tional problem with the problem of the colonies. The national 
problem was thereby transformed from a particular and internal 
state problem into a general and international problem, into a 
world problem of emancipating the oppressed peoples in the de- 
pendent countries and colonies from the yoke of imperialism. 

Formerly, the principle of self-determination of nations was usu- 
ally misinterpreted, and not infrequently it was narrowed down 
to the idea of the right of nations to autonomy. Certain leaders 
of the Second International even went so far as to represent the 
right to self-determination as meaning the right to cultural au- 
tonomy — the right of oppressed nations to have their own cul- 
tural institutions, leaving all political power in the hands of the 
ruling nation. As a consequence the idea of self-determination 
stood in danger of becoming transformed from an instrument for 
combating annexations into an instrument for justifying them. 
Now we can say that this confusion has been cleared up. Leninism 
broadened the conception of self-determination and interpreted it 
as the right of the oppressed peoples of the dependent countries 
and colonies to complete secession, as the right of nations to in- 
dependent existence as states. This precluded the possibility of 
justifying annexations by interpreting the right to self-determina- 
tion to mean the right to autonomy. Thus the principle of self- 
determination itself was transformed from an instrument for de- 
ceiving the masses, which it undoubtedly was in the hands of the 
social-chauvinists during the imperialist war, into an instrument 
for exposing all and sundry imperialist aspirations and chauvinist 
machinations, into an instrument for the political education of the 
masses in the spirit of internationalism. 

Formerly, the question of the oppressed nations was usually 
regarded as purely a juridical question. Solemn proclamations re- 
garding “national equality,” innumerable declarations about the 
“equality of nations”— that was the fare of the parties of the 
Second International which glossed over the fact that “equality of 



184 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

nations” under imperialism, where one group of nations (a 
minority) lives by exploiting another group of nations, is sheer 
mockery of the oppressed nations. Now we can say that this 
bourgeois-juridical point of view on the national question has been 
exposed. Le nini sm brought the national problem down from the 
lofty heights of high-sounding declarations to solid ground, and 
declared that pronouncements about the “equality of nations” 
which are not backed by the direct support of the proletarian 
parties for the liberation struggle of the oppressed nations are 
meaningless and false. In this way the question of the oppressed 
nations became a question of supporting, of rendering real and 
continuous assistance to the oppressed nations in their struggle 
against imperialism for real equality of nations, for their inde- 
pendent existence as states. 

Formerly, the national problem was regarded from a reformist 
point of view, as an independent problem having no connection 
with the general problems of the rule of capital, of the overthrow 
of imperialism, of the proletarian revolution. It was tacitly assumed 
that the victory of the proletariat in Europe was possible without 
a direct alliance with the liberation movement in the colonies, 
that the national-colonial problem could be solved on the quiet, 
“of its own accord,” off the high road of the proletarian revolution, 
without a revolutionary struggle against imperialism. Now we 
can say that this anti-revolutionary point of view has been ex- 
posed. Leninism has proved, and the imperialist war and the 
revolution in Russia have confirmed, that the national problem 
can be solved only in connection with and on the basis of the pro- 
letarian revolution, and that the road to victory of the revolution 
in the West lies through the revoludonary alliance with the libera- 
tion movement of the colonies and dependent countries against 
imperialism. The national problem is a part of the general prob- 
lem of the proletarian revolution, a part of the problem of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat. 

The question presents itself as follows: Are the revolutionary 
possibilities latent in the revolutionary liberation movement of 



THE NATIONAL QUESTION 1 85 

the oppressed countries already exhausted or not; and, if not, is 
there any hope, any ground to expect, that these possibilities can 
be utilized for the proletarian revolution, that the dependent and 
colonial countries can be transformed from a reserve of the im- 
perialist bourgeoisie into a reserve of the revolutionary proletariat, 
into an ally of the latter? 

Leninism replies to this question in the affirmative— it recog- 
nizes the latent revolutionary capacities of the national liberation 
movement of the oppressed countries and the possibility of utiliz- 
ing these capacities for the purpose of overthrowing the common 
enemy, for the purpose of overthrowing imperialism. The me- 
chanics of the development of imperialism, the imperialist war 
and the revolution in Russia wholly confirm the conclusions of 
Leninism on this score. 

Hence the necessity for the proletariat to support — resolutely 
and actively to support— the national liberation movement of the 
oppressed and dependent peoples. 

This does not mean, of course, that the proletariat must support 
every national movement, everywhere and always, in every single 
concrete case. It means that support must be given to such na- 
tional movements as tend to weaken, to overthrow imperialism, 
and not to strengthen and preserve it. Cases occur when the na- 
tional movements in certain oppressed countries come into con- 
flict with the interests of the development of the proletarian move- 
ment. In such cases support is, of course, entirely out of the 
question. The question of the rights of nations is not an isolated, 
self-sufficient question; it is a part of the general problem of the 
proletarian revolution, subordinate to the whole, and must be 
considered from the point of view of the whole. In the forties of 
the last century Marx supported the national movement of the 
Poles and Hungarians and was opposed to the national movement 
of the Czechs and the South Slavs. Why? Because the Czechs 
and the South Slavs were then ‘reactionary nations,” “Russian 
outposts” in Europe, outposts of absolutism; whereas the Poles 
and the Hungarians were “revolutionary nations,” fighting 



1 86 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

against absolutism. Because support o£ the national movement o£ 
the Czechs and the South Slavs was at that time equivalent to 
indirect support for tsarism, the most dangerous enemy of the 
revolutionary movement in Europe. 

The various demands of democracy [writes Lenin], including 
self-determination, are not an absolute, but a small part o£ the general 
democratic (now, general socialist) world movement. ... In indi- 
vidual concrete cases, the part may contradict the whole; if so, it 
must be rejected . 81 

This is the position in regard to the question of certain national 
movements, of the possible reactionary character of these move- 
ments — if, of course, they are appraised not from the formal point 
of view, not from the point of view of abstract rights, but, con- 
cretely, from the point of view of the interests of the revolutionary 
movement. 

The same must be said of the revolutionary character of na- 
tional movements in general. The unquestionably revolutionary 
character of the overwhelming majority of national movements 
is as relative and peculiar as is the possible reactionary character 
of certain particular national movements. The revolutionary char- 
acter of a national movement under the conditions of imperialist 
oppression does not necessarily presuppose the existence of pro- 
letarian elements in the movement, the existence of a revolution- 
ary or a republican program of the movement, the existence of a 
democratic basis of the movement. The struggle the Emir of 
Afghanistan is waging for the independence of Afghanistan is 
objectively a revolutionary struggle, despite the monarchist views 
of the Emir and his associates, for it weakens, disintegrates and 
undermines imperialism; whereas the struggle “desperate” demo- 
crats and “socialists,” “revolutionaries” and republicans, such as, 
for example, Kerensky and Tsereteli, Renaudel and Scheidemann, 
Chernov and Dan, Henderson and Clynes, waged during the 
imperialist war was a reactionary struggle, for its result was the 



THE NATIONAL QUESTION 1 87 

whitewashing, the strengthening, the victory of imperialism. 
For the same reasons, the struggle the Egyptian merchants and 
bourgeois intellectuals are waging for the independence of Egypt 
is objectively a revolutionary struggle, despite the bourgeois origin 
and bourgeois title of the leaders of the Egyptian national move- 
ment, despite the fact that they are opposed to socialism; whereas 
the fight the British Labor Government is waging to perpetuate 
Egypt’s dependent position is for the same reasons a reactionary 
struggle, despite the proletarian origin and the proletarian title 
of the members of that government, despite the fact that they are 
“for” socialism. I need not speak of the national movement in 
other, larger, colonial and dependent countries, such as India 
and China, every step of which along the road to liberation, even 
if it runs counter to the demands of formal democracy, is a steam- 
hammer blow at imperialism — is undoubtedly a revolutionary 
step. 

Lenin was right in saying that the national movement of the 
oppressed countries should be appraised not from the point of 
view of formal democracy, but from the point of view of the actual 
results obtained, as shown by the general balance sheet of the 
struggle against imperialism, that is to say, “not ... in isolation, 
but on ... a world scale.” 82 

II. THE LIBERATION MOVEMENT OF THE 
OPPRESSED PEOPLES AND THE 
PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION 

In solving the national problem Leninism proceeds from the 
following theses: 

a. The world is divided into two camps: the camp of a handful 
of civilized nations, which possess finance capital and exploit the 
vast majority of the population of the globe; and the camp of the 
oppressed and exploited peoples in the colonies and dependent 
countries, who comprise that majority; 

b. The colonies and the dependent countries, oppressed and 



l88 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

exploited by finance capital, constitute a very large reserve and 
a very Important source of strength for Imperialism; 

c. The revolutionary struggle of the oppressed peoples in the 
dependent and colonial countries against imperialism is the only 
road that leads to their emancipation from oppression and ex- 
ploitation; 

d. The most Important colonial and dependent countries have 
already taken the path of the national liberation movement, which 
cannot but lead to the crisis of world capitalism; 

e. The interests of the proletarian movement in the developed 
countries and of the national liberation movement in the colonies 
call for the amalgamation of these two forms of the revolutionary 
movement into a common front against the common enemy, 
against imperialism; 

fi The victory of the working class in the developed countries 
and the liberation of the oppressed peoples from the yoke of im- 
perialism are impossible without the formation and the consolida- 
tion of a common revolutionary front; 

g. The formation of a common revolutionary front is im- 
possible unless the proletariat of the oppressor nations renders 
direct and determined support to the liberation movement of the 
oppressed peoples against the imperialism of its “own country/’ 
for ££ no nation can be free if it oppresses other nations” (Marx) ; 

h. This support implies the advocacy, defense, and carrying out 
of the slogan of the right of nations to secession, to independent 
existence as states; 

L Unless this slogan is carried out, the union and collaboration 
of nations within a single world economic system, which is the 
material basis for the victory of socialism, cannot be brought 
about; 

j. This union can only be voluntary, and can arise only on the 
basis of mutual confidence and fraternal relations among nations. 

Hence the two sides, the two tendencies in the national problem: 
the tendency towards political emancipation from the shackles 
of imperialism and towards the formation of an independent 



THE NATIONAL QUESTION 


189 

national state — a tendency which arose as a consequence of im- 
perialist oppression and colonial exploitation; and the tendency 
towards an economic rapprochement among nations, which arose 
as a result of the formation of a world market and a world eco- 
nomic system. 

Developing capitalism [says Lenin] knows of two historical 
tendencies in the national problem. First: the awakening of national 
life and of national movements, the struggle against all national 
oppression, the creation of national states. Second: the development 
and growing frequency of all sorts of intercourse among nations; 
the breaking down of national barriers; the creation of the inter- 
national unity of capital, of economic life in general, of politics, of 
science, and so forth. Both tendencies are the universal law of capi- 
talism. The first predominates at the beginning of the development 
of capitalism; the second characterizes mature capitalism, heading 
towards its transformation into socialist society . 83 

For imperialism these two tendencies represent irreconcilable 
contradictions; because imperialism cannot exist without exploit- 
ing colonies and forcibly retaining them within the framework 
of the “integral whole”; because imperialism can bring nations 
together only by means of annexations and colonial conquest, 
without which it is, generally speaking, inconceivable. 

For communism, on the contrary, these tendencies are but two 
sides of a single cause — the cause of the emancipation of the op- 
pressed peoples from the yoke of imperialism; because communism 
knows that the union of the nations in a single world economic 
system is possible only on the basis of mutual confidence and vol- 
untary agreement, and that the road to the formation of a volun- 
tary union of nations lies through the separation of the colonies 
from the “integral” imperialist “whole,” through the transforma- 
tion of the colonies into independent states. 

Hence the necessity of a stubborn, continuous and determined 
struggle against the imperialist chauvinism of the “Socialists” of 
the ruling nations (Great Britain, France, America, Italy, Japan, 
and so forth), who do not want to fight cheir imperialist govern- 



I9O MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

merits, who do not want to support the struggle of the oppressed 
peoples in “their” colonies for emancipation from oppression, for 
secession. 

Without such a struggle the education of the working class of 
the ruling nations in the spirit of true internationalism, in the spirit 
of rapprochement with the toiling masses of the dependent coun- 
tries and colonies, in the spirit of real preparation for the proletarian 
revolution, is inconceivable. The revolution would not have been 
victorious in Russia, and Kolchak and Denikin would not have 
been crushed, had not the Russian proletariat enjoyed the sympathy 
and support of the oppressed peoples of the former Russian empire. 
But to win the sympathy and support of these peoples it had first 
of all to break the fetters of Russian imperialism and free these 
peoples from the yoke of national oppression. Without this it 
would have been impossible to consolidate the Soviet power, to 
implant true internationalism and to create that remarkable organ- 
ization for the collaboration of nations which is called the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics— the living prototype of the future 
union of nations in a single world economic system. 

Hence the necessity of fighting against the national insularity, 
narrowness and aloofness of the Socialists in the oppressed coun- 
tries, who do not want to rise above their national steeple and who 
do not understand the connection between the liberation movement 
in their various countries and the proletarian movement in the 
ruling countries. 

Without such a struggle it is inconceivable that the proletariat 
of the oppressed nations can maintain an independent policy and 
its class solidarity with the proletariat of the ruling countries in 
the fight for the overthrow of the common enemy, in the fight for 
the overthrow of imperialism; without such a struggle, interna- 
tionalism would be impossible. 

This is how the toiling masses of the ruling nations and of the 
oppressed nations should be educated in the spirit of revolutionary 
internationalism. 



THE NATIONAL QUESTION I9I 

Here is what Lenin says about this twofold task of communism 
in educating the workers in the spirit of Internationalism: 

. . . Can such education ... be concretely identical in great, op- 
pressing nations and in small, oppressed nations, in annexing nations 
and in annexed nations? 

Obviously not. The way to the one goal — to complete equality, to 
the closest intimacy and the subsequent amalgamation of all nations 
— obviously proceeds here by different routes in each concrete case; 
in the same way, let us say, as the route to a point in the middle of 
a given page lies towards the left from one edge and towards the 
right from the opposite edge. If a Social-Democrat belonging to a 
great, oppressing, annexing nation, while advocating the amalga- 
mation of nations in general, were to forget even for one moment 
that “his” Nicholas II, “his” Wilhelm, George, Poincare, etc., also 
stand for amalgamation with small nations (by means of annexa- 
tions) — Nicholas II being for “amalgamating” with Galicia, Wil- 
helm II for “amalgamating” with Belgium, etc. — such a Social- 
Democrat would be a ridiculous doctrinaire in theory and an abettor 
of imperialism In practice. 

The weight of emphasis in the internationalist education of the 
workers in the oppressing countries must necessarily consist in 
advocating and urging them to demand freedom of secession for 
oppressed countries. Without this there can be no internationalism. 
It is our right and duty to treat every Social-Democrat of an op- 
pressing nation who fails to conduct such propaganda as an impe- 
rialist and a scoundrel. This is an absolute demand, even if the 
chance of secession being possible and “feasible” before the intro- 
duction of socialism is only one in a thousand. . . . 

On the other hand, a Social-Democrat belonging to a small nation 
must emphasize in his agitation the second word of our general 
formula: “voluntary union” of nations. He may, without violating 
his duties as an internationalist, be in favor of either the political 
independence of his nation or its inclusion in a neighboring state 
X, Y, Z, etc. But in all cases he must fight against small-nation 
narrow-mindedness, insularity and aloofness, he must fight for the 
recognition of the whole and the general, for the subordination of 
the interests of the particular to the interests of the general. 



I92 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

People who have not gone thoroughly into the question think 
there is a “contradiction” in Social-Democrats of oppressing nations 
insisting on “freedom of secession,” while Social-Democrats of op- 
pressed nations insist on “freedom of union.” However, a little 
reflection will show that there is not, nor can there be, any other 
road leading from the given situation to internationalism and the 
amalgamation of nations, any other road to this goal . 84 

A lecture delivered at the Sverdlov University, 

April, 1924. 



The Soviet Republics of the East 


What are the characteristic features in the existence and devel- 
opment of these countries, these republics, that distinguish them 
from the colonial and dependent countries? 

First, these republics are free from the yoke of imperialism. 

Secondly, they are developing and consolidating themselves as 
nations not under the aegis of the bourgeois regime, but under the 
aegis of Soviet government. This is a fact without precedent in 
history, but it is a fact. 

Thirdly, inasmuch as they are but slightly developed industrially, 
they can, in their development, rely fully and completely on the 
support of the industrial proletariat of the Soviet Union. 

Fourthly, being free of the colonial yoke, finding themselves 
under the aegis of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and being 
members of the Soviet Union, these republics can and should 
become fellow-builders of socialism in our country. 

The fundamental task is to help the workers and peasants of 
these republics to become fellow-builders of socialism in our coun- 
try; to create and develop conditions, in accordance with the spe- 
cific circumstances of the life of each of these republics, that will 
promote and accelerate this fellowship. 

Hence the immediate tasks which confront active workers in the 
Soviet East: 

i. To create industrial centers in the Soviet republics of the East 
as bases on which the peasants can be rallied around the working 
class. You know that this work has already been begun and that 
it will progress with the economic growth of the Soviet Union. 
The fact that these countries possess all kinds of raw materials 
is a guarantee that in time this work will be completed. 

m 



194 MARXISM and the national question 

2. To advance agriculture and above all irrigation. As you know, 
this work, too, is progressing, at least in Transcaucasia and in 
Turkestan. 

3. To improve and advance cooperative organization among 
the broad masses of the peasants and handicraftsmen as the most 
reliable way of bringing the Soviet republics of the East into the 
general system of Soviet economic development. 

4. To bring the Soviets into closer touch with the masses; to 
make them national in composition, and in this way to implant a 
national Soviet state organization that will be close and compre- 
hensible to the toiling masses. 

5* To develop national culture; to build up a wide system of 
courses and schools for both general education and vocational and 
technical training, teaching in the native languages, with the pur- 
pose of training Soviet, party, trade union and economic cadres 
from among the native people. 

It is the accomplishment of these tasks that will facilitate the 
work of socialist construction in the Soviet republics of the East. 

People talk of model republics in the Soviet East. But what is a 
model republic? A model republic is one that honestly and con- 
scientiously performs all these tasks, thereby creating an impulsion 
among the workers and peasants of neighboring colonial and 
dependent countries towards the movement for emancipation. 

I have spoken of bringing the Soviets into closer touch with the 
toiling masses of the nationalities, of naturalizing the Soviets. But 
what does this mean, and how does it manifest itself in practice? 
I think that the recent delimitation of national frontiers in Turke- 
stan may be regarded as an excellent example of how the Soviets 
can be brought into closer touch with the masses. The bourgeois 
press regards this delimitation of frontiers as “Bolshevik trickery.” 
Yet it is clear that this is a manifestation not of “trickery,” but of 
the profound aspiration of the masses of the people of Turkmeni- 
stan and Uzbekistan for their own organs of government, which 
shall be close and comprehensible to them. In the pre-revolutionary 
era, both these countries were torn into fragments, into various 



THE SOVIET REPUBLICS OF THE EAST 1 95 

\hanates and states, and were a convenient field for the explora- 
tory machinations of the “powers that be.” The time has now come 
when these scattered fragments can be reunited Into independent 
states, so that the toiling masses of Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan 
can be united and welded with the organs of government. The 
delimitation of frontiers in Turkestan is primarily the reunion of 
the scattered parts of these countries into Independent states. The 
fact that these states then desired to join the Soviet Union as equal 
members thereof merely signifies that the Bolsheviks have found 
the key to the profound aspirations of the masses of the East, and 
that the Soviet Union is the only voluntary union of the toiling 
masses of various nationalities in the world. In order to reunite 
Poland, the bourgeoisie required a series of wars. But in order to 
reunite Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, the Co mm unists required 
only a few months of explanatory propaganda. 

That is the way to bring the organs of administration, in this 
case the Soviets, into close touch with the broad masses of the 
toilers of the various nationalities. 

That is the proof that the Bolshevik national policy is the only 
right policy. 

I further spoke of raising the level of national culture in the 
Soviet republics of the East. But what is national culture? How is 
it to be made compatible with proletarian culture? Did not Lenin, 
even before the war, say that there are two cultures — bourgeois 
culture and socialist culture— and that the demand for national 
culture is a reactionary demand of the bourgeoisie, which strives 
to infect the minds of the workers with the virus of nationalism? 
How are we to render the development of national culture, the 
development of schools and courses in the native languages, and 
the training of Communist cadres from among local people, com- 
patible with the building of socialism, with the building of a pro- 
letarian culture? Is this not an irreconcilable contradiction? Of 
course not! We are building a proletarian culture. That is abso- 
lutely true. But it is also true that proletarian culture, which is 
socialist in content, assumes different forms and methods of expres- 



I96 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

sion among the various peoples that have been drawn into the 
work o£ socialist construction, depending on differences o£ lan- 
guage, customs, and so forth. Proletarian in content and national 
in form — such is the universal human culture towards which 
socialism is marching. Proletarian culture does not cancel national 
culture, but lends it content. National culture, on the other hand, 
does not cancel proletarian culture, but lends it form. The demand 
for national culture was a bourgeois demand as long as the bour- 
geoisie was in power and the consolidation of nations proceeded 
under the aegis of the bourgeois system. The demand for national 
culture became a proletarian demand when the proletariat came 
into power and the consolidation of nations began to proceed under 
the aegis of Soviet government. Whoever has not grasped the 
fundamental difference between these two situations will never 
understand either Leninism or the essence of the national question 
from the standpoint of Leninism. 

Certain persons (Kautsky, for instance) talk of the creation of a 
single universal language in the period of socialism and the dying 
away of all other languages. I have little faith in this theory of a 
single, all-embracing language. Experience, at any rate, speaks 
against rather than for such a theory. Until now the situation has 
been that the socialist revolution has not diminished but rather 
increased the number of languages; for, by stirring up the pro- 
found depths of humanity and by pushing them into the political 
arena, it awakens to new life a number of hitherto unknown or 
little known nationalities. Who could have imagined that old, 
tsarist Russia consisted of no less than fifty nationalities and ethnic 
groups? However, by breaking the old chains and bringing a 
number of forgotten peoples and nationalities on the scene, the 
October Revolution gave them new life and a new development. 
Nowadays, India is spoken of as a single whole. Yet there can 
be hardly any doubt that in the case of a revolutionary upheaval 
in India many hitherto unknown nationalities, each with its own 
language and its own distinctive culture, will emerge on the scene. 
And if it is a question of the participation of various nationalities 



THE SOVIET REPUBLICS OF THE EAST 1 97 

in the proletarian culture, there can be hardly any doubt that such 
participation will assume forms corresponding to the languages 
and the customs of these nationalities. 

Not long ago I received a letter from some Buryat comrades 
asking me to explain the serious and difficult questions concer nin g 
the relation between universal culture and national culture. Here 
it is: 


We earnestly request you to explain the following, for us very 
serious and difficult, questions. The ultimate aim of the Communist 
Party is to achieve a single universal culture. How is the transition 
to the single universal culture through the national cultures, which 
are developing in our various autonomous republics, conceived? 
How is the assimilation of the peculiarities of the various national 
cultures (language and so forth) to take place? 

I think that what has just been said might serve as an answer to 
the question that is agitating these Buryat comrades. 

The Buryat comrades raise the question of the assimilation of 
individual nationalities in the process of formation of a universal 
proletarian culture. Undoubtedly, certain nationalities may, and 
even certainly will, undergo a process of assimilation. Such proc- 
esses have occurred before. But the point is that the process of 
assimilation of certain nationalities does not preclude, but rather 
presupposes, the opposite process of reinforcement and develop- 
ment of a number of powerful nationalities, for the partial process 
of assimilation is a result of the general process of development of 
nationalities. It is because of this that the possible assimilation of 
individual nationalities does not weaken, but, on the contrary, con- 
firms the proposition, an absolutely correct proposition, that uni- 
versal proletarian culture does not preclude, but rather presupposes 
and fosters national culture, just as national culture does not 
nullify, but rather supplements and enriches universal proletarian 
culture. 

Such, in general, are the immediate tasks confronting the active 
workers of the Soviet republics of the East. 



I98 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Such is the character and substance of these tasks. 

The period of intense economic development and fresh con- 
cessions to the peasantry that has supervened must be turned to 
account in order to hasten the fulfillment of these tasks and thus 
help the Soviet republics of the East, which are principally peasant 
countries, in becoming fellow-builders of socialism in the Soviet 
Union. 

It is said that the new policy of the party towards the peasantry, 
by making a number of concessions (short-term leases, permission 
to employ hired labor), involves certain elements of retreat. Is 
that true? Yes, it is true. But these are elements of retreat which 
are conceded by us while the overwhelming superiority of forces 
is retained by the party and the Soviet government. A stable cur- 
rency, a developing industry, a developing transport, a credit sys- 
tem growing ever stronger, with the aid of which, by granting 
credits on favorable terms, one can ruin any given stratum of the 
population or raise it to a higher level without the least disturb- 
ance — all these are such reserves in the hands of the proletarian 
dictatorship that, thanks to them, certain elements of retreat on 
one sector of the front can but facilitate the preparations for a 
general offensive along the whole front. That is why certain 
fresh concessions made by the party to the peasantry should at 
the present time help rather than hinder the peasantry in becom- 
ing fellow-builders of socialism. 

What significance can this circumstance have for the Soviet 
republics of the East? Its significance can only be that it places 
in the hands of the active workers in these republics a new weapon 
with which to facilitate and accelerate the work of linking these 
countries with the general system of Soviet economic develop- 
ment. 

Such is the connection between the policy of the party in the 
rural districts and the immediate tasks confronting the active 
workers in the Soviet East. 

In this connection, the task of the University of the Peoples of 
the East in relation to the Soviet republics of the East is to train 



THE SOVIET REPUBLICS OF THE EAST 1 99 

cadres for these republics in such a way as to ensure the fulfillment 
of those immediate tasks which have been enumerated. 

The University of the Peoples of the East cannot cut itself off 
from life. It is not and must not be an institution standing aloof 
from life. It must be bound up with real life with every fiber of 
its being. It cannot, therefore, abstract itself from the immediate 
tasks confronting the Soviet republics of the East. That is why 
the task of the University of the Peoples of the East is to take 
account of the immediate tasks of these republics when training 
the appropriate cadres for them. 

And one must bear in mind the two deviations in the practice 
of the active workers in the Soviet East, which must be combated 
within the walls of this university if real cadres and real revolu- 
tionaries are to be trained for the Soviet East. 

The first deviation lies in oversimplification, in an oversimplifi- 
cation of the tasks I have spoken of, in an attempt mechanically 
to transplant models of economic development which are quite 
comprehensible and practicable in the center of the Soviet Union 
but which are absolutely inapplicable to the conditions of develop- 
ment of what are known as the border regions. The comrades who 
commit this deviation fail to understand two things. They do not 
understand that conditions in the center and in the “border 
regions” are not the same and are far from being identical. They 
do not understand, furthermore, that the Soviet republics of the 
East themselves are not all alike, that some of them, for instance 
Georgia and Armenia, are at a higher stage of national integra- 
tion, others, such as Chechnya and Kabarda, are at a lower stage 
of national integration, while others, such as Kirghizistan, occupy a 
position midway between the two extremes. These comrades do 
not understand that unless the work is adapted to local conditions, 
unless each and every peculiarity of each country is taken into 
account, nothing solid and stable can be built up. The result o£ 
this deviation is that they become divorced from the masses and 
degenerate into Left phrasemongers. The task of the University 



200 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

of the Peoples of the East is to train cadres in a spirit of irrecon- 
cilable warfare against such oversimplification. 

The second deviation, on the contrary, lies in an exaggeration 
of local peculiarities, in the fact that the common and main thing 
which links these Eastern republics with the industrial regions of 
the Soviet Union is forgotten, that socialist tasks are hushed up 
and that adaptations are made to the aims of a narrow and re- 
stricted nationalism. The comrades who commit this deviation are 
little concerned with the internal development of their country, 
they prefer to leave this development to the natural course of 
events. The most important thing for them is not internal de- 
velopment but “foreign” politics, the extension of the frontiers 
of their republic, litigation with neighboring republics, the desire 
to filch territory from their neighbors, and thereby to find favor 
with the bourgeois nationalists in their country. The result of this 
deviation is that they become divorced from socialism and de- 
generate into ordinary bourgeois nationalists. The task of the 
University of the Peoples of the East is to train cadres in a spirit 
of irreconcilable warfare against this latent nationalism. 

From a speech delivered at the University 
of the Peoples of the East, May 18, 1925. 



The Proletarian Solution of 
the National Question 


The October Revolution has shaken imperialism not only in 
the centers of its domination, not only in the “mother countries ” 
It has also struck blows at the rear of imperialism, its periphery, 
having undermined the rule of imperialism in the colonial and 
dependent countries. 

Having overthrown the landlords and the capitalists, the Oc- 
tober Revolution has broken the chains of national and colonial 
oppression and freed from it, without exception, all the oppressed 
nations of a vast state. The proletariat cannot emancipate itself 
without emancipating the oppressed nations. It is a characteristic 
feature of the October Revolution that it accomplished these na- 
tional-colonial revolutions in the U.S.S.R. not under the flag of 
national enmity and conflicts among nations, but under the flag 
of mutual confidence and fraternal rapprochement of the workers 
and peasants of the various nationalities in the U.S.S.R.; not in 
the name of nationalism, but in the name of internationalism. 

It is precisely because the national-colonial revolutions took 
place in our country under the leadership of the proletariat and 
under the banner of internationalism that pariah nations, slave na- 
tions, have for the first time in the history of mankind risen to the 
position of nations which are really free and really equal, thereby 
setting a contagious example for the oppressed nations of the 
whole world. 

This means that the October Revolution has ushered in a new 
era, the era of colonial revolutions which are being conducted in 
the oppressed countries of the world in alliance with the prole- 
tariat and under the leadership of the proletariat. 

It was formerly the “accepted idea” that the world has been 

201 



202 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

divided from time immemorial into inferior and superior races, 
into blacks and whites, of whom the former are unfit for civiliza- 
tion and are doomed to be objects of exploitation, while the latter 
are the only vehicles of civilization, whose mission it is to exploit 
the former. This legend must now be regarded as shattered and 
discarded. One of the most important results of the October Revo- 
lution is that it dealt this legend a mortal blow, having shown in 
practice that liberated non-European nations, drawn into the chan- 
nel of Soviet development, are not a bit less capable of promoting 
a really progressive culture and a really progressive civilization 
than are the European nations. 

It was formerly the “accepted idea” that the only method of lib- 
erating the oppressed nations is the method of bourgeois national- 
ism, the method of nations drawing apart from each other, the 
method of disuniting nations, the method of intensifying national 
enmity among the laboring masses of the various nations. This 
legend must now be regarded as disproved. One of the most im- 
portant results of the October Revolution is that it dealt this le- 
gend a mortal blow, having demonstrated in practice the possibility 
and expediency of the proletarian, international method of liber- 
ating the oppressed nations as being the only correct method, hav- 
ing demonstrated in practice the possibility and expediency of a 
fraternal union of the workers and peasants of the most diverse 
nations on the principles of voluntariness and internationalism. 
The existence of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which is 
the prototype of the future amalgamation of the working people 
of all countries in a single world economic system, cannot but 
serve as direct proof of this. 

From an article on the international character 
of the October Revolution. 

Pravda, No. 255, November 5-7, 1927. 



Deviations on the National Question 


The picture of the struggle against deviations in the party will 
be incomplete if we do not touch upon the deviations on the na- 
tional question which exist in the party. I have in mind, first, 
the deviations towards Great-Russian chauvinism, and, secondly, 
the deviation towards local nationalism. These deviations are not 
so noticeable and insistent as the “Left” or Right deviations. They 
might be called creeping deviations. But this does not mean that 
they do not exist. They do exist and, what is more, they are grow- 
ing. Of this there can be no doubt. There can be no doubt of this, 
because the general atmosphere of accentuated class struggle is 
bound to lead to a certain accentuation of national friction, which 
is in its way reflected in the party. Therefore, we must lay bare 
the nature of these deviations and expose them to the light of day. 

What is the essence of the deviation toward Great-Russian 
chauvinism in our present-day conditions ? 

The essence of the deviation towards Great-Russian chauvinism 
is an endeavor to ignore national differences of language, culture, 
and mode of life; an endeavor to prepare the way for the aboli- 
tion of the national republics and regions; an endeavor to under- 
mine the principle of national equality and bring into disrepute 
the party policy of naturalizing the administrative apparatus, and 
of naturalizing the press, schools, and other state and public or- 
ganizations. 

The deviators of this type proceed from the argument that since 
with the victory of socialism nations must become fused into a 
single whole, and their national languages must become con- 
verted into a single, common language, the time has come to put 
an end to national differences and to renounce the policy of fos- 
tering the development of the national culture of formerly op* 

203 



204 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

pressed peoples. In this connection they usually refer to Lenin, 
misquoting him, and sometimes directly distorting and slandering 
him. Lenin said that under socialism the interests of nationalities 
will become fused into a single whole; does it not follow from this 
that it is time to put an end to the national republics and regions, 
in the interests of . . . internationalism ? Lenin said in 1913 in the 
controversy with the Bundists that the watchword of national cul- 
ture is a bourgeois watchword; does it not follow from this that it 
is time to put an end to the national culture of the peoples of the 
U.S.S JR., in the interests of . . . internationalism ? Lenin said that 
national oppression and national barriers will be abolished under 
socialism; does it not follow from this that it is time to put an end 
to the policy of reckoning with the national peculiarities of the 
peoples of the U.S.S.R. and to adopt the policy of assimilation, 
in the interests of . . . internationalism ? And so on, and so forth. 

There can be no doubt that this deviation in the national ques- 
tion, which, moreover, is decked by a mask of internationalism 
and the name of Lenin, is the most subtle and therefore the most 
dangerous form of Great-Russian nationalism. 

First, Lenin never said that national differences must disappear 
and national languages become fused into one common language 
within the boundaries of a single state, before the victory of so- 
cialism on a world scale . Lenin, on the contrary, said something 
diametrically opposite, namely, that “national and state differ- 
ences among peoples and countries . . . will continue to exist for a 
very long time , even after the dictatorship of the proletariat has 
been established on a world scale ” (" Left-Wing ” Communism , 
an Infantile Disorder.) How can people refer to Lenin and forget 
this cardinal statement of his? 

True, one of the former Marxists, today a renegade and a re- 
formist, Mr. Kautsky, says something which is quite contrary to 
what Lenin teaches us. He asserts, despite Lenin, that the victory 
of the proletarian revolution in a united Austro-German state in 
the middle of the last century would have led to the creation of a 
single, common German language, and to the Germanizing of the 



DEVIATIONS ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 2O5 

Czechs, because “the force of unfettered intercourse alone, the 
force of the modern culture brought by the Germans alone 
would, without any forcible Germanization, have transformed 
into Germans the backward Czech petty bourgeois, peasants, and 
proletarians, who could expect nothing from their shabby nation- 
ality (See his preface to the German edition of Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution .) Naturally, such a “conception” fully har- 
monizes with Kautsky ’s social-chauvinism. 

It was these views of Kautsky’s that I combated in 1925, in my 
speech to the University of the Peoples of the East. But can we, 
Marxists, who desire to be consistent internationalists, really at- 
tach any positive significance to such anti-Marxist rubbish of an 
arrant German social-chauvinist ? Who is right, Kautsky or 
Lenin? If Kautsky is right, how can we explain the fact that such 
relatively backward nationalities as the White-Russians and the 
Ukrainians, which are closer to the Great-Russians than the 
Czechs are to the Germans, were not Russified as a result of the 
victory of the proletarian revolution in the U.S.S.R., but, on the 
contrary, were regenerated and developed as independent nations? 
How are we to explain the fact that, in spite of their backward- 
ness, such nations as the Turkmens, the Kirghiz, the Uzbeks, the 
Tadjiks (not to mention the Georgians, Armenians, Azerbai- 
janians, and so on), far from being Russified in consequence of 
the victory of socialism in the U.S.S.R., were regenerated and de- 
veloped into independent nations? Is it not clear that our worthy 
deviators, in their chase after sham internationalism, have fallen 
into the clutches of Kautskian social-chauvinism? Is it not clear 
that in agitating for one common language within the boundaries 
of a single state, within the boundaries of the U.S.S.R., they are in 
fact striving for the restoration of the privileges of the formerly 
dominant language, namely, the Great-Russian language? Where 
does internationalism come in here? 

Secondly, Lenin never said that the abolition of national op- 
pression and the fusion of the interests of nationalities into a 
single whole is equivalent to the abolition of national differences. 



206 marxism and the national question 

We have abolished national oppression, we have abolished na- 
tional privileges and established national equality. We have abol- 
ished state frontiers in the old sense of the term, frontier posts and 
customs barriers between the nationalities of the U.S.S.R. We 
have established a unity of economic and political interests of the 
peoples of the U.S.S.R. But does this mean that we have thereby 
abolished national differences: national languages, culture, cus- 
toms, and so on? Obviously, it does not mean that. But if na- 
tional differences, language, culture, customs, and so on, remain, 
is it not obvious that the demand for the abolition of the national 
republics and regions in the present period of history is a reac- 
tionary demand, directed against the interests of the proletarian 
dictatorship ? Do our deviators realize that to abolish the national 
republics and regions now would mean to deprive the vast masses 
of the peoples of the U.S.S.R. of the opportunity of receiving edu- 
cation in their native language, to deprive them of the opportunity 
of having their schools, courts, administration, public and other 
organizations and institutions operating in their native language, 
and to deprive them of the possibility of partaking in socialist 
construction? Is it not obvious that in the chase after a sham 
internationalism our deviators have fallen into the clutches of the 
reactionary Great-Russian chauvinists and have forgotten, com- 
pletely forgotten, the watchword of cultural revolution in the 
period of proletarian dictatorship, which applies equally to all the 
peoples of the U.S.S.R., both to the Great-Russians and to the non- 
Great-Russians ? 

Thirdly, Lenin never said that the watchword of developing 
national culture under the proletarian dictatorship is a reactionary 
watchword. On the contrary, Lenin was always in favor of help- 
ing the peoples of the U.S.S.R. to develop their national culture. 
It was under the guidance of none other than Lenin that the 
Tenth Party Congress drew up and adopted a resolution on the 
national question which explicitly states that: 

The task of the party is to help the toiling masses of the non- 
Great-Russian peoples to catch up with Central Russia, which is 



DEVIATIONS ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 2O7 

ahead of them, and to help them (a) to develop and consolidate 
their own Soviet state system in forms consistent with the national 
social conditions of these peoples; (b) to develop and consolidate 
their own courts, administrative bodies, economic organs and 
government organs, functioning in the native language and 
recruited from among local people acquainted with the customs 
and psychology of the local population; (c) to develop a press, 
schools, theaters, clubs and cultural and educational institutions 
generally functioning in the native language, and (d) to organize 
and develop an extensive system of courses and schools, both for 
general education and for vocational and technical training given 
in the native languages. 

Is it not obvious that Lenin was entirely and completely in 
favor of the watchword of developing national culture under the 
dictatorship of the proletariat? 

Is it not obvious that the denial of the watchword of national 
culture under the dictatorship of the proletariat is a denial of the 
necessity for the cultural progress of the non-Great-Russian peo- 
ples in the U.S.SJR., the denial of the necessity for universal com- 
pulsory education for these peoples, and their consignment to 
spiritual enslavement to the reactionary nationalists? 

Lenin, it is true, described the watchword of national culture 
under the supremacy of the bourgeoisie as a reactionary watch- 
word. But could it have been otherwise? What is national culture 
under the supremacy of the national bourgeoisie? A culture bour- 
geois in content and national in form, the aim of which is to in- 
fect the masses with the virus of nationalism and to consolidate 
the supremacy of the bourgeoisie. What is national culture under 
the dictatorship of the proletariat? A culture socialist in content 
and national in form, the aim of which is to educate the masses in 
the spirit of internationalism and to consolidate the dictatorship of 
the proletariat. How can these two fundamentally different things 
be confused, unless one renounces Marxism? Is it not obvious 
that in fighting the watchword of national culture under the bour- 
geois system Lenin was striking at the bourgeois content of na- 



208 marxism and the national question 

tional culture, and not at its national form? It would be foolish 
to imagine that Lenin considered socialist culture to be a non- 
national culture, which did not possess a definite national form. 
The Bundists in fact did at one time attribute such nonsensical 
views to Lenin. But from Lenin’s works we know that he vigor- 
ously protested against this slander and resolutely dissociated 
himself from such nonsense. Can it be that our worthy deviators 
have after all followed in the footsteps of the Bundists ? 

What remains, after what has been said, of the arguments of 
our deviators? 

Nothing, except a juggling with the flag of internationalism and 
slanders against Lenin. 

The deviators towards Great-Russian chauvinism are profoundly 
mistaken if they think that the period of the building of social- 
ism in the U.S.S.R. is a period of decay and liquidation for na- 
tional cultures. Quite the opposite is the case. As a matter of fact, 
the period of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the building 
of socialism in the U.S.S.R. is a period in which national culture, 
socialist in content and national in form, blossoms. Apparently 
they do not realize that the development of national cultures is 
bound to proceed with a new impetus when universal compulsory 
elementary education in the respective native languages has been 
introduced and has taken root. They fail to realize that only if the 
national cultures develop will it be possible to secure the real 
participation of the backward nationalities in the work of socialist 
construction. They do not realize that this is the very basis of the 
Leninist policy of assisting and supporting the development of 
the national cultures of the peoples of the U.S.S.R. 

It may seem strange that we, who are in favor of the fusion of 
national cultures in the future into one common culture (both 
in form and in content), with a single, common language, are at 
the same time in favor of the blossoming of national cultures at 
the present time, in the period of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
But there is nothing strange in this. The national cultures must be 
permitted to develop and expand and to reveal all their potential 



DEVIATIONS ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 20 $ 

qualities. In order to create the conditions necessary for their fusion 
into a single, common culture with a single, common language. 
The blossoming of cultures national in form and socialist In con- 
tent under a proletarian dictatorship in one country, with the ob- 
ject of their fusion into a single, common, socialist (both in form 
and content) culture, with a single, common language, when the 
proletariat is victorious throughout the world and socialism be- 
comes an everyday matter-such is the dialectical nature of the 
Leninist presentation of the question of national culture. 

It may be said that, presented in this way, the question is “self- 
contradictory.” But is there not the same sort of “self-contradic- 
tion” in our treatment of the question of the state? We are in 
favor of the withering away of the state, yet we are at the same 
time in favor of strengthening the dictatorship of the proletariat, 
which represents the most powerful and mighty of all forms of 
state power that have hitherto existed. The supreme development 
of the power of the state, with the object of preparing the way for 
the withering away of state power — such is the Marxist formula. 
Is that “self-contradictory” ? Yes, it is “self-contradictory.” But 
this contradiction is a living thing, and it is a complete reflection 
of Marxian dialectics. 

Or take, for example, the way Lenin presents the question of 
the right of nations to self-determination, including secession. 
Lenin sometimes expressed the thesis of national self-determina- 
tion in the form of a simple formula: “Disunion for the purpose 
of union.” Just think — disunion for the purpose of union! It even 
smacks of the paradoxical. And yet this “self-contradictory” for- 
mula reflects that living truth of Marxian dialectics which enables 
the Bolsheviks to capture the most impregnable fortresses in the 
sphere of the national question. 

The same must be said of the formula of national culture: the 
blossoming of national cultures (and languages) in the period of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat in one country, with the object 
of preparing the way for their dying away and fusion into a single, 



210 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

common, socialist culture (and a single, common language) in 
the period of the victory of socialism all over the world. 

Whoever has failed to understand this peculiarity and this “self- 
contradictory” nature of our transitional times, whoever has failed 
to understand this dialectical character of historical processes, is 
lost to Marxism. 

It is the misfortune of our deviators that they do not understand 
and do not want to understand Marxian dialectics. 

That is the position with regard to the deviation towards Great- 
Russian chauvinism. 

It is not difficult to understand that this deviation reflects the 
striving of the moribund classes of the formerly dominant Great- 
Russian nation to win back their lost privileges. 

Hence the danger of Great-Russian chauvinism, the principal 
danger in the party in the sphere of the national question. 

What is the essence of the deviation towards local nationalism ? 

The essence of the deviation towards local nationalism consists 
in the attempt to isolate oneself and shut oneself up within one’s 
own national shell, in the attempt to hush up class differences 
within one’s own nation, in the attempt to resist Great-Russian 
chauvinism by turning aside from the general current of socialist 
construction, in the attempt to shut one’s eyes to that which brings 
together and unites the toiling masses of the nationalities of the 
U.S.SJR. and to see only that which tends to estrange them. 

The deviation towards local nationalism reflects the dissatis- 
faction of the moribund classes of the formerly oppressed nations 
with the regime of the proletarian dictatorship, their endeavor to 
separate themselves into their national state and there to estab- 
lish their own class supremacy. 

The danger of this deviation lies in the fact that it cultivates 
bourgeois nationalism, weakens the unity of the toiling peoples of 
the U.S.S.R. and plays into the hands of the interventionists. 

That is the essence of the deviation towards local nationalism. 

The task of the party is to wage a resolute struggle against this 
deviation and to create the conditions necessary for the interna- 



DEVIATIONS ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 21 1 

tional education of the toiling masses of the peoples of the Soviet 
Union. 


FROM THE REPLY TO THE DISCUSSION 

The second group of written questions concerns the national 
problem. One of these written questions, which I regard as the 
most interesting of all, compares the treatment of the problems of 
national languages in my report at the Sixteenth Congress with 
the treatment of it in my lecture at the University of the Peoples 
of the East in 1925 and finds a certain lack of clarity requiring 
elucidation. The note says: 

You objected then to the theory [Kautsky’s] about the dying 
way of national languages and the creation of a single, common 
language in the period of socialism [in one country], while now, 
in your report at the Sixteenth Congress, you declare that Com- 
munists favor the fusion of the national cultures and national 
languages into a single, common culture with a single, common 
language [in the period of the victory of socialism on a world scale]. 
Is there not a lack of clarity here? 

I think there is neither a lack of claritiy nor a contradiction 
here. When I spoke in 1925, I was opposing Kautsky’s national- 
chauvinist theory, according to which a victory of the proletarian 
revolution in the middle of the last century in a united Austro- 
German state would have led to the fusion of nations into a single, 
common German nation with a single, co mm on German lan- 
guage and to the Germanizing of the Czechs. I objected to this 
theory on the grounds that it was an anti-Marxist and anti- 
Leninist theory, and cited facts from the life of our country after 
the victory of socialism in the U.S.S.R. which refute this theory. 
I still object to this theory, as is evident from my report at this 
Sixteenth Congress. I object to it because the theory of the fusion 
of all the nations of, say, the U.S.SR. into a single, common 
Great-Russian nation with a single, common Great-Russian lan- 
guage is a national-chauvinist, anti-Leninist theory, which is 



212 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

contrary to the cardinal principle of Leninism that national dif- 
ferences cannot disappear in the near future, and that they are 
bound to remain for a long time, even after the victory of the pro- 
letarian revolution on a world scale. As to the remoter prospects 
of national cultures and national languages, I have always main- 
tained, and continue to maintain, the Leninist view that in the 
period of the victory of socialism on a world scale, when socialism 
has been consolidated and has become a matter of everyday life, 
the national languages will inevitably fuse into a single, common 
language, which, of course, will be neither Great-Russian nor Ger- 
man, but something new. Of this I also spoke quite definitely in 
my report at the Sixteenth Congress. 

Where then is the lack of clarity here, and what is it really that 
requires elucidation? 

I think the writers of the note are not entirely clear on at least 
two points. 

First, they have not realized that we in the U.S.S.R. have al- 
ready entered the period of socialism, and that in spite of the 
fact that we have entered this period the nations, far from dying 
away, are developing and blossoming. Have we, in fact, entered 
the period of socialism ? Our period is usually called a period of 
transition from capitalism to socialism. It was called a transition 
period in 1918, when Lenin, in his famous article, c< ‘Left-Wing’ 
Childishness,” first described this period with its five forms of 
economic life. It is called a transition period today, in 1930, when 
some of these forms, having become obsolescent, are already go- 
ing to the bottom, while one of them, namely, the new form in 
industry and agriculture, is growing and developing with un- 
precedented speed. Can it be said that these two transitional peri- 
ods are identical, that they do not radically differ from each other? 
Clearly not. What did we have in 1918 in the economic sphere? A 
ruined industry and mechanical cigarette-lighters,* no collective 

* At that time, when the metal industry was in a state of disorganization 
and the factories at a standstill, the workers frequently resorted to making 
cigarette-lighters for their own account. — Ed. 



DEVIATIONS ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION 213 

or Soviet farms as a mass phenomenon, the growth of the “new” 
bourgeoisie in the towns and the kulaks in the country. What 
have we today? A socialist industry, restored and being recon- 
structed, a developed system of Soviet and collective farms em- 
bracing over 40 per cent of the total sown area of the U.S.SIL for 
spring crop alone, a moribund “new” bourgeoisie in the town and 
a moribund kulak class in the country. The first was a transitional 
period, the second is a transitional period. And yet they are as 
far removed as heaven and earth. And yet no one can deny that 
we are on the eve of liquidating the last important capitalist class, 
the kulak class. It is obvious that we have already emerged from 
the transitional period in the old sense and have entered a period 
of direct and extensive socialist construction along the whole line. 
It is obvious that we have already entered the period of socialism, 
because the socialist sector now controls all the economic levers 
of the entire national economy, although we are still a long way 
from the completion of a socialist society and the abolition of 
class differences. And yet, despite this, far from the national lan- 
guages dying away and fusing into a single, common language, 
we find that the national cultures and the national languages are 
developing and blossoming. Is it not obvious that the theory of the 
dying away of national languages and their fusion into a single, 
common language within a single state in the period of extensive 
socialist construction, in the period of socialism in one country, 
is an incorrect, anti-Marxist, anti-Leninist theory? 

Secondly, the writers of the note have not realized that the dy- 
ing away of national languages and their fusion into a single 
common language is not an internal state question, not a question 
of the victory of socialism in one country, but an international 
question, a question of the victory of socialism on an international 
scale. The writers of the note have failed to realize that we must 
not confuse the victory of socialism in one country with the victory 
of socialism internationally. It was not without good reason that 
Lenin said that national differences will remain for a long time 
even after the victory of the proletarian dictatorship on an inter- 



214 MARXISM and the national question 

national scale. Furthermore, we must bear in mind another cir- 
cumstance which affects a number of nationalities of the U.S.S.R, 
There is a Ukraine in the U.S.S.R. But there is another Ukraine in 
other states. There is a White Russia in the U.S.S.R. But there is 
another White Russia in other states. Do you imagine that the 
question of the Ukrainian and White-Russian languages can be 
settled without taking these peculiar conditions into account? 
Take, further, the nationalities of the U.S.S.R. situated along the 
Southern frontier, from Azerbaijan to Kazakstan and Buryat- 
Mongolia. They are all in the same position as the Ukraine and 
White Russia. Obviously, here too we have to reckon with the 
peculiar conditions of development of these nationalities. Is it not 
clear that all these and similar questions associated with the prob- 
lem of national cultures and national languages cannot be settled 
within the framework of one state, within the framework of the 
U.S.S.R.? 

That is the situation, comrades, as regards the national question 
in general, and the note on the national question I have men- 
tioned in particular. 

From a report delivered at the Sixteenth Congress 
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, 

June 27, 1930. 



Deviations Towards Nationalism 


• ..Take, for example the national problem. Here, too, in the 
sphere of the national problem, just as in the sphere of other prob- 
lems, there is a confusion in the views of a section of the party 
which creates a certain danger. I have spoken of the tenacity of 
the survivals of capitalism. It should be observed that the survivals 
of capitalism in people’s minds are much more tenacious in the 
sphere of the national problem than in any other sphere. They 
are more tenacious because they are able to disguise themselves 
well in national costume. Many think that Skrypnik’s fall was an 
individual case, an exception to the rule. This is not true. The fall 
of Skrypnik and his group in the Ukraine is not an exception. 
Similar “dislocations” are observed among certain comrades in 
other national republics as well. 

What is the deviation towards nationalism — regardless of 
whether we refer to the deviation towards Great-Russian nation- 
alism or to the deviation towards local nationalism? The devia- 
tion towards nationalism is the adaptation of the internationalist 
policy of the working class to the nationalist policy of the bour- 
geoisie. The deviation towards nationalism reflects the attempts 
of “one’s own” “national” bourgeoisie to undermine the Soviet 
system and to restore capitalism. The source of both these devia- 
tions, as you see, is the same. It is a departure from Leninist inter- 
nationalism. If you want to keep both these deviations under 
fire, then aim primarily against this source, against these who de- 
part from internationalism — regardless of whether the deviation 
is towards local nationalism or towards Great-Russian nation- 
alism. 

There is a controversy as to which deviation represents the 

215 



21 6 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

major danger: the deviation towards Great-Russian nationalism, 
or the deviation towards local nationalism? Under present condi- 
tions, this is a formal and, therefore, a pointless controversy. It 
would be absurd to attempt to give ready-made recipes suitable for 
all times and for all conditions as regards the major and the 
minor danger. Such recipes do not exist. The major danger is the 
deviation against which we have ceased to fight, thereby allowing 
it to grow into a danger to the state. 

In the Ukraine, only very recently, the deviation towards 
Ukrainian nationalism did not represent the major danger; but 
when we ceased to fight it and allowed it to grow to such an ex- 
tent that it merged with the interventionists, this deviation be- 
came the major danger. The question as to which is the major 
danger in the sphere of the national problem is determined not 
by futile, formal controversies, but by a Marxian analysis of the 
situation at the given moment, and by a study of the mistakes that 
have been committed in this sphere. 

From a report delivered at the Seventeenth Congress 
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, 

January 26, 1934. 



The National Question and the 
Soviet Constitution 


The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, as you know, was 
formed in 1922, at the First Congress of Soviets of the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.). It was formed on the prin- 
ciples of equality and voluntary affiliation of the peoples of the 
U.S.S.R. The Constitution now in force, adopted in 1924, was the 
first Constitution of the U.S.S.R. That was the period when rela- 
tions among the peoples had not yet been properly adjusted, when 
survivals of distrust towards the Great Russians had not yet disap- 
peared, and when centrifugal forces still continued to operate. 
Under those conditions it was necessary to establish fraternal co- 
operation among the peoples on the basis of economic, political, 
and military mutual aid by uniting them in a single, federated, 
multi-national state. The Soviet government could not but see the 
difficulties of this task. It had before it the unsuccessful experiments 
of multi-national states in bourgeois countries. It had before it the 
experiment of old Austria-Hungary, which ended in failure. 
Nevertheless, it resolved to make the experiment of creating a 
multi-national state, for it knew that a multi-national state which 
has arisen on the basis of socialism is bound to stand every and any 
test. 

Since then fourteen years have elapsed. A period long enough to 
test the experiment. And what do we find? This period has shown 
beyond a doubt that the experiment of forming a multi-national 
state based on socialism has been completely successful. This is the 
undoubted victory of the Leninist national policy. 

How is this victory to be explained? 

The absence of exploiting classes, which are the principal organ- 
izers of strife between nations; the absence of exploitation, which 

317 



21 8 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

cultivates mutual distrust and kindles nationalist passions; the fact 
that power is in the hands of the working class, which is the foe of 
all ensla v emen t and the true vehicle of the ideas of international- 
ism; the actual practice of mutual aid among the peoples in all 
spheres of economic and social life; and, finally, the flourishing 
national culture of the peoples of the U.S.S.R., culture which is 
national in form and socialist in content — all these and similar 
factors have brought about a radical change in the aspect of the 
peoples of the U.S.S.R.; their feeling of mutual distrust has disap- 
peared, a feeling of mutual friendship has developed among them, 
and thus real fraternal co-operation among the peoples has been 
established within the system of a single federated state. 

As a result, we now have a fully formed multi-national socialist 
st ate, which has stood all tests, and whose stability might well be 
envied by any national state in any part of the world. 

Such are the changes which have taken place during this period 
in the sphere of national relations in the U.S.S.R. 

Such is the sum total of changes which have taken place in the 
sphere of the economic and social-political life of the U.S.S.R. in 
the period from 1924 to 1936. 

Further. Bourgeois constitutions tacitly proceed from the prem- 
ise that nations and races cannot have equal rights, that there are 
nations with full rights and nations without full rights, and that, 
in addition, there is a third category of nations or races, for example 
in the colonies, which have even fewer rights than the nations with- 
out full rights. This means that, at bottom, all these constitutions 
are nationalistic — constitutions of ruling nations. 

Unlike these constitutions, the draft of the new Constitution of 
the U.S.S.R. is, on the contrary, profoundly internationalistic. It 
proceeds from the proposition that all nations and races have equal 
rights. It proceeds from the fact that neither difference in color or 
language, cultural level, or level of political development, nor any 
other difference between nations and races, can serve as grounds 
for justifying national inequality of rights. It proceeds from the 
proposition that all nations and races, irrespective of their past and 



NATIONAL QUESTION AND SOVIET CONSTITUTION 21 9 

present position, irrespective of their strength or weakness, should 
enjoy equal rights in all spheres of the economic, social, political, 
and cultural life of society. 


COMMENTS ON AMENDMENTS TO THE 
CONSTITUTION 

. . . Then follows an amendment to Article 17 of the Draft Con- 
stitution. The amendment proposes that we completely delete from 
the Constitution Article 17, which reserves to the Union Republics 
the right of free secession from the U.S.S.R. I think that this pro- 
posal is a wrong one and therefore should not be adopted by the 
Congress. The U.S.S.R. Is a voluntary union of Union Republics 
with equal rights. To delete from the Constitution the article pro- 
viding for the right of free secession from the U.S.S.R. would be 
to violate the voluntary character of this union. Can we agree to this 
step? I think that we cannot and should not agree to it. It is said 
that there is not a single republic in the U.S.S.R. that would want 
to secede from the U.S.S.R., and that therefore Article 17 is of no 
practical importance. It is, of course, true that there is not a single 
republic that would want to secede from the U.S.S.R. But this 
does not in the least mean that we should not fix in the Constitution 
the right of Union Republics freely to secede from the U.S.S.R. 
In the U.S.S.R. there is not a single Union Republic that would 
want to subjugate another Union Republic. But this does not in 
the least mean that we ought to delete from the Constitution of 
the U.S.S.R. the article dealing with the equality of rights of 
the Union Republics. 

Then there is a proposal that we add a new article to Chapter II 
of the Draft Constitution, to the following effect: that on reaching 
the proper level of economic and cultural development Autono- 
mous Soviet Socialist Republics may be raised to the status of Union 
Soviet Socialist Republics. Can this proposal be adopted? I think 
that it should not be adopted. It is a wrong proposal not only be- 
cause of its content, but also because of the condition it lays down. 



220 MARX IS M AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 

Economic and cultural maturity can no more be urged as grounds 
for transf er ring Autonomous Republics to the category of Union 
Republics than economic or cultural backwardness can be urged 
as grounds for leaving any particular republic in the list of Auton- 
omous Republics. This would not be a Marxist, not a Leninist ap- 
proach. The Tatar Republic, for example, remains an Autonomous 
Republic, while the Kazakh Republic is to become a Union Re- 
public; but this does not mean that from the standpoint of cultural 
and economic development the Kazakh Republic is on a higher 
level than the Tatar Republic. The very opposite is the case. The 
same can be said, for example, of the V olga German Autonomous 
Republic and the Kirghiz Union Republic, of which the former is 
on a higher cultural and economic level than the latter, although 
it remains an Autonomous Republic. 

What are the grounds for transferring Autonomous Republics 
to the category of Union Republics? 

There are three such grounds. 

First, the republic concerned must be a border republic, not sur- 
rounded on all sides by U.S.S.R. territory. Why? Because since the 
Union Republics have the right to secede from the U.S.S.R., a re- 
public, on becoming a Union Republic, must be in a position log- 
ically and actuall y to raise the question of secession from the 
U.S.S.R. And this question can be raised only by a republic which, 
say, borders on some foreign state, and, consequently, is not sur- 
rounded on all sides by U.S.SR. territory. Of course, none of our 
republics would actually raise the question of seceding from the 
U.S.SR. But since the right to secede from the U.S.S.R. is reserved 
to the Union Republics, it must be so arranged that this right does 
not become a meaningless scrap of paper. Take, for example, the 
Bashkir Republic or the Tatar Republic. Let us assume that these 
Autonomous Republics are transferred to the category of Union 
Republics. Could they logically and actually raise the question of 
seceding from the U.S.S.R.? No, they could not. Why? Because 
they are surrounded on all sides by Soviet republics and regions, 
and, strictly speaking, they have nowhere to go to if they secede 



NATIONAL QUESTION AND SOVIET CONSTITUTION 221 

from the U.S.S.R. Therefore, it would be wrong to transfer such 
republics to the category of Union Republics. 

Secondly, the nationality which gives its name to a given Soviet 
republic must constitute a more or less compact majority within 
that republic. Take the Crimean Autonomous Republic, for ex- 
ample. It is a border republic, but the Crimean Tatars do not con- 
stitute the majority in that republic; on the contrary, they are a 
minority. Co~sequently, it would be wrong and illogical to transfer 
the Crimean Republic to the category of Union Republics. 

Thirdly, the republic must not have too small a population; it 
should have a population of, say, not less but more than a million, 
at least. Why ? Because it would be wrong to assume that a small 
Soviet Republic with a very small population and a small army 
could hope to maintain its existence as an independent state. There 
can hardly be any doubt that the imperialist beasts of prey would 
soon lay hands on it. 

I think that unless these three objective grounds exist, it would 
be wrong at the present historical moment to raise the question of 
transferring any particular Autonomous Republic to the category 
of Union Republics. 

The fifth amendment concerns Article 33. The creation of two 
Chambers is regarded as inexpedient, and it is proposed that the 
Soviet of Nationalities be abolished. I think that this amendment 
is also wrong. A single-chamber system would be better than a 
dual-chamber system if the U.S.S.R. were a single-nation state. But 
the U.S.S.R. is not a single-nation state The U.S.S.R., as we know, 
is a multi-national state. We have a supreme body in which are 
represented the common interests of all the working people of the 
U.S.S.R. irrespective of nationality. This is the Soviet of the Union. 
But in addition to common interests, the nationalities of the 
U.S.S.R. have their particular, specific interests, connected with 
their specific national characteristics. Can these specific interests be 
ignored? No, they cannot. Do we need a special supreme body to 
reflect precisely these specific interests? Unquestionably, we do. 
There can be no doubt that without such a body it would be im- 



222 MARXISM AND THE NATIONAL QUESTION 


possible to administer a multi-national state like the U.S.S.R. Such 
a body is the second chamber, the Soviet of Nationalities of the 
U.S.S.R. 

Reference is made to the parliamentary history of European and 
American states; it is pointed out that the dual-chamber system in 
these countries has produced only negative results — that the sec- 
ond chamber usually degenerates into a center of reaction and a 
brake on progress. All that is true. But this is due to the fact that 
in those countries there is no equality between the two chambers. 
As we know, the second chamber is not infrequently granted more 
rights than the first chamber, and, moreover, as a rule the second 
chamber is constituted undemocratically, its members not infre- 
quently being appointed from above. Undoubtedly, these defects 
will be obviated if equality is established between the chambers 
and if the second chamber is constituted as democratically as the 
first. 

Further, an addendum to the Draft Constitution is proposed call- 
ing for an equal number of members in both chambers. I think that 
this proposal might be adopted. In my opinion, it has obvious po- 
litical advantages, for it emphasizes the equality of the chambers. 

Next comes an addendum to the Draft Constitution which pro- 
poses that the members of the Soviet of Nationalities be elected by 
direct vote, as in the case of the members of the Soviet of the Union. 
I think that this proposal might also be adopted. True, it may create 
certain technical inconveniences during elections; but, on the other 
hand, it would be of great political advantage, for it would enhance 
the prestige of the Soviet of Nationalities. 

From a report to the Eighth All-Union Congress 
of Soviets, November 25, 1936. 



REFERENCE NOTES 


1. See ‘‘Report of tlie Ninth Con- 

ference of the Bund.” 

2. See “Announcement of the 

August Conference.” 

3. Rudolph Springer, Das nation- 

ale Problem {The National 
Problem ) , Leipzig and 
Vienna, 1902, p. 35. 

4. Otto Bauer, Die N ationaliiaten- 

{rage und die Sozialdemo - 
\ratie {The National Ques- 
tion and Social - Democ- 
racy), Vienna, 1924, p. 2. 

5. Ibid., p. 6. 

6. Ibid., p. 2. 

7. Ibid., p. 24. 

8. Ibid., p. 135. 

9. Ibid., p. 2. 

10. Ibid., p. 2. 

11. Ibid., p. 373. 

12. Ibid. 

13. Ibid., p. 379. 

14. Ibid., p. 2. 

15. Ibid., p. 126. 

16. Ibid., p. 3 79. 

17. Joseph Strasser, Der Arbeiter 

und die Nation {T he 
Worker and the Nation ), 
Reichenberg, 1912, p. 33. 

18. Bauer, op. cit., p. 161. 

19. V. Kossovsky, Problems of 

Nationality, 1907, pp. 16- 
J 7- 

20. Springer, op. cit., pp. io-u* 

21. Bauer, op. cit., p. 382. 

22. Ibid., p. 404. 

23. Springer, op. cit., p. 29. 


24. Ibid., p. 29. 

25. Bauer, op. cit., p. 384. 

26. Verhandlungen des Gesamtpar- 

teitages zu Briinn, 1899. 

27. Springer, op. cit., p. 246. 

28. Bauer, op. at., p. 527. 

29. Ibid., p. 533. 

30. Springer, op. cit., p. 15. 

31. Bauer, op. cit., p. 274. 

32. Springer, op. cit., p. 61. 

33. Ibid., pp. 72-73. 

34. Bauer, op. cit., p. 530. 

35. Springer, op. cit., p. 192. 

36. Bauer, op. cit., p. 354. 

37. Ibid., p. 360. 

38. Springer, op. cit., p. 200. 

39. Bauer, op. cit., p. 531. 

40. Ibid., p. 323. 

41. Ibid., p. 319. 

42. Ibid., p. 533. 

43. Ibid. 

44. Ibid., p. 521. 

45. Ibid., p. 522. 

4 6. Verhandlungen des Gesamt- 

parteitages zu Brimn, 1899, 
p. 85. 

47. Bauer, op. cit., p. 531. 

48. Ibid., p. 533. 

49. Karl Marx and Frederick En- 

gels, The Communist Mani- 
festo, New York, p. 28. 

50. Bauer, op. cit., p. 379. 

51. Ibid., p. 373. 

52. Karl Marx, “Zur Judenfrage” 

(‘The Jewish Question’ 1 ), 
German-French Annual, 
1844. 



REFERENCE NOTES 


53. Karl Kautsky, “Das Kischin- 

jewer Blutbad” (“The Ki- 
shenev Pogrom”), 1906. 

54. Bauer, op. cit., p. 373. 

55. See Kastelyansky, editor. Forms 

of the National Movement, 
etc., p. 772, Russian ed. 

56* Minutes of the Second Congress 
of the Russian Social- 
Democratic Labor Party , 

p. 176. 

57. Report of the Eighth Confer- 

ence of the Bund, 1911, p. 

62. 

58. Ibid., pp. 83-84. 

59. Ibid., p. 85. 

60. Report of the Ninth Confer- 

ence of the Bund, 1912, 
p. 42. 

61. Report of the Eighth Confer- 

ence of the Bund, p. 83. 

62. Ibid., p. 68. 

63. An Announcement on the Sev- 

enth Congress of the Bund, 

p. 7. 

64. Report of the Eighth Confer- 

ence of the Bund, p. 72. 

65. National Autonomy and the Re- 

form of the Russian Social- 
Democratic Labor Party on 
Federal Lines, published by 
the Bund, 1902. 

66. Nashe Slovo {Our Word, a 

Bund weekly), Vienna, 
1906, No. 3, p. 24. 

67. National Autonomy and the 

Reform of the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labor 
Party on Federal Lines, 
published by the Bund, 
1902. p. 17. 


68 . Report of the Ninth Confer- 

ence of the Bund, p. 19. 

69. N. [Noah Jordania], “The 

Old and the New,” printed 
in the Georgian Menshevik 
newspaper Chveni Ts\ho - 
vreba {Our Life), 1912. 

70. Ibid. 

71. Nasha Zarya {Our Star), 1912, 

No. 9-10, p. 120. 

72. Nashe Slovo {Our Word), 

1906, No. 8, p. 53. 

73. See “Resolution on the Com- 

munity,” Report of the 
Eighth Conference of the 
Bund. 

74. Strasser, op. cit. 

75. The Twelfth Conference of the 

Bund, 1920, p. 21. 

76. See “Program of the Russian 

Communist Party.” 

77. V. I. Lenin, Selected Wor\s, 

New York, Vol. IV, p. 
275 ' 

78. V. I. Lenin, Selected Wor\s t 

New York, VoL V, p. 
272. 

79. Ibid. 

80. The Correspondence of Karl 

Marx and Frederic \ En- 
gels, New York, p. 87. 

81. V. I. Lenin, Collected W or \s, 

New York, Vol. XIX, pp. 
287-88. 

82. Ibid., p. 287. 

83. V. I. Lenin, Collected Wor\s, 

Vol. XVII, pp. 139-49, Rus- 
sian ed. 

84. V. I. Lenin, Collected Wor\s, 

New York, Vol. XIX, pp. 
292-93. 







