MEIN KAMPF 


ADOLF HITLER 



VOLUME ONE 


NEw YORK, LONDON 
CLEMENS & BLAIR, LLC 
2018 


CLEMENS & BLAIR, LLC 

Introduction and English translation copyright © 2018 by Thomas Dalton, PhD 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 


mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise. 


Clemens & Blair, LLC, is a non-profit educational publisher. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Hitler, Adolf (1889-1945) 
Mein Kampf (vol. 1) 


p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references. 


ISBN 978-197-4502967 (pbk.: alk. paper) 


Printing number: 9 87654321 


Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper. 


DEDICATION 


At 12:30 pm, on 9 November 1923, the following men fell in front of the 
Feldhermhalle and in the courtyard of the former War Ministry in 
Munich, with loyal faith in the resurrection of their people: 


Alfarth, Felix; merchant; b. 5 July 1901 

Bauriedl, Andreas; hatter; b. 4 May 1879 

Casella, Theodor; bank clerk; b. 8 August 1900 

Ehrlich, Wilhelm; bank clerk; b. 19 August 1894 

Faust, Martin; bank clerk; b. 27 January 1901 

Hechenberger, Anton; locksmith; b. 28 September 1902 

K6mer, Oskar; businessman; b. 4 January 1875 

Kuhn, Karl; headwaiter; b. 26 July 1897 

Laforce, Karl; engineering student; b. 28 October 1904 

Neubauer, Kurt; valet; b. 27 March 1899 

Pape, Claus von; businessman; b. 16 August 1904 

Pfordten, Theodor von der; court councilor; b. 14 May 1873 

Rickmers, Johann; retired captain; b. 7 May 1881 

Scheubner-Richter, Max Erwin von; doctor of engineering; b. 9 
January 1884 

Stransky, Lorenz von; engineer; b. 14 March 1889 

Wolf, Wilhelm; businessman; b. 19 October 1898 


The so-called national authorities refused these dead heroes a common 
grave. 


Therefore, for the common memory, I dedicate to them the first volume of 
this work. As martyrs to the cause, may they shine forever, as a permanent 
inspiration to the followers of our movement. 


Adolf Hitler 
Landsberg am Lech 
16 October 1924 


CONTENTS 


Introduction by Thomas Dalton 


VOLUME ONE: A RECKONING 


1. IN MY PARENTS’ HOUSE 
1.1 The Young Ringleader 
12 ‘Choice’ of Profession 
1.3 Never a Civil Servant... 
1.4 — ...But Rather an Artist 
1.5 The Young Nationalist 
1.6 The German Ostmark 
1.7. The Struggle for Germanism 
1.8 Lessons from History 
1.9 Devotion to Wagner 
1.10 The Death of my Parents 


2. YEARS OF STUDY AND SUFFERING IN VIENNA 


2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
29 
2.10 
2.11 
2.12 
2.13 
2.14 
2.15 
2.16 
2.17 
2.18 
2.19 
2.20 


Skill as an Architect 

Formation of a Worldview 
Removal of Petty-Bourgeois Blinders 
Vienna’s Social Conflicts 

The Laborer 

Fate of the Worker 

The Path to Improvement 

Lack of ‘National Pride’ 

The Ordeal of the Worker’s Child 
Young Despiser of Authority 
Architect and Watercolor Painter 
The Art of Reading 

Social Democracy 

The Social-Democratic Press 
Social-Democratic Tactics 

Sins of the Bourgeoisie 

The Trade Union Question 
Politicization of the Trade Unions 
The Key to Social Democracy 
The Jewish Question 


13 


45 


47 
48 
49 


50 
51 
55 
56 


58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
73 
76 
78 
80 
80 
82 
84 
85 


221 
Zoo, 
2.20 
2.24 
2.25 
2.26 
221 


The So-Called World Press 

Criticism of Kaiser Wilhelm II 
Transformation into an Anti-Semite 

The Jew as Leader of Social Democracy 
Jewish Dialectics 

Study of the Foundations of Marxism 
Marxism as Destroyer of Culture 


86 
87 
88 
93 
95 
96 
97 


3. GENERAL POLITICAL REFLECTIONS FROM MYTIME IN 
VIENNA 


3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

3.6 

3.7 

3.8 

3.9 

3.10 
3.11 
3.12 
3.13 
3.14 
3.15 
3.16 
3.17 
3.18 
3,19 
3.20 
3.21 
3.22 
3.23 
3.24 
3.25 
3.26 
3.27 
3.28 
3.29 
3.30 


The Politician 

Vienna’s Last Revival 

Germandom in Austria 

Centrifugal Forces of the Austrian People 
Consequences of Ethnic Diversity 
Joseph II 


The Dissolution of the Habsburg Monarchy 


Parliamentarianism 

Lack of Responsibility 

The Destruction of the Idea of Leadership 
The Exclusion of the Individual Leader 
‘Public Opinion’ 

The Majority Principle 

The Destruction of Character 

Jewish Democracy 

The Collapsing Dual Monarchy 
Rebellion of the German-Austrians 
Human Rights override States’ Rights 
Sch6énerer and Lueger 

The Causes of Schénerer’s Failure 
Pan-Germans and Parliament 

The Importance of the Spoken Word 
Effect on the Mass 

The ‘Away-from-Rome’ Movement 
Concentration on a Single Enemy 

The Way of Christian Socialism 
Anti-Semitism on a Religious Basis 
Pan-Germanism and Christian Socialism 
Growing Aversion to the Habsburg State 
The School of My Life 


100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
111 
112 
113 
115 
117 
120 
121 
122 
124 
125 
127 
130 
131 
134 
135 
136 
144 
145 
146 
147 
149 
150 


4. MUNICH 


4.1 Germany’s Defective Alliance Policy 
4.2 The Four Paths of German Policy 
4.3, Acquisition of New Land 
4.4 With England, Against Russia 
4.5 Solution to the Austrian Alliance 
4.6 Economic Expansion Policy 
4.7 With Russia, Against England 
4.8 German Caricature of the Englishman 
4.9 Inner Weakness of the Triple Alliance 
4.10 Ludendorff’s 1912 Memorandum 
4.11 Austria as a Tempting Legacy 
4.12 State and Economy 
4.13 The Moment of Decay 
4.14 Germany’s Attitude toward Marxism 
5. THE WORLD WAR 
5.1 The Austrian Ultimatum 
5.2 The German War for Freedom 
5.3. Enlistment in a Bavarian Regiment 
5.4 Baptism by Fire 
5.5 From Young Volunteer to Old Soldier 
5.6 Artificial Dampening of Enthusiasm 
5.7 Misrecognizing Marxism 
5.8 The Use of Naked Force 
5.9 Attack of a Worldview 
5.10 Bourgeois Class Parties 
6. WAR PROPAGANDA 
6.1 The Purpose of Propaganda 
6.2 Propaganda Only for the Masses 
6.3 The Psychology of Propaganda 
6.4 Subjective—One-Sided—Necessary! 
6.5 Restriction on Perseverance 
6.6 Enemy War Propaganda 
7, THE REVOLUTION 
7.1 The First Enemy Leaflets 
7.2 Wounded 
7.3 Boasting of Cowardice 


154 
157 
162 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
176 
177 


181 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
191 
192 


196 
197 
199 
200 
202 
203 


206 
207 
208 


7.4 
75 
7.6 
Wel 
7.8 
7.9 
7.10 
7.11 
7.12 
7.13 
7.14 


Slackers 

Hatred of Prussia 

The Army’s New Hope 

The Allies are Beaten Down 
“Germany Facing Revolution!” 
Last Wreaths of Immortal Laurel 
Growing Moral Decay 
Poisoned by Mustard Gas 
‘Republic’ 

All Sacrifice in Vain 

Decision to Enter Politics 


8. THE BEGINNING OF MY POLITICAL ACTIVITY 


8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 


Discussion of the Formation of a New Party 
Two Types of Capital 

Theoretician and Politician 

Marathon Runners of History 

The Fight against International Finance Capital 
The ‘Educational Officer’ 


9. THE ‘GERMAN WORKERS’ PARTY’ 


9.1 
9.2 
9.3 


The ‘German Workers’ Party’ 
The ‘Committee Meeting’ 
A Final Decision 


10. CAUSES OF THE COLLAPSE 


10.1 
10.2 
10.3 
10.4 
10.5 
10.6 
10.7 
10.8 
10.9 
10.10 
10.11 
10.12 
10.13 
10.14 
10.15 


The Sign of Collapse 

The Causes of Collapse 

Every Third German a Traitor 

Moral Disarmament of a Dangerous Accuser 
Toxins and Symptoms 

The Rule of Money 

Internationalization through Finance 
Gravediggers of the Monarchy 
‘Fighters for the Monarchy’ 

Cowardice in the Face of Responsibility 
Three Groups of Newspaper Readers 
State and Press 

Jewish Press Tactics 

The ‘Respectable’ Press 

Syphilis 


209 
210 
211 
212 
214 
215 
216 
217 
219 
220 
221 


224 
225 
226 
228 
228 
230 


232 
234 
236 


240 
241 
243 
245 
246 
247 
248 
249 
251 
252 
252 
254 
255 
255 
257 


10.16 
10.17 
10.18 
10.19 
10.20 
10.21 
10.22 
10.23 
10.24 
10.25 
10.26 
10.27 
10.28 
10.29 
10.30 
10.31 
10.32 
10.33 
10.34 


The Sin against Blood and Race 

The Task of Combating Syphilis 
Sound Mind only in Sound Body 
The Fight against Spiritual Poisoning 
The ‘Protection Clause’ 

The Bolshevization of Art 
Vilification of a Great Past 

Spiritual Preparation for Bolshevism 
Modern Masses of Humanity 
Religious Conditions 

Political Misuse of Religion 
Aimlessness of German Policy 
Parliamentary Half-Measures 
Parliamentary Crimes against the Army 
Failed Navy Policy 

German Advantages 

The Army—An Irreplaceable School 
The Incomparable Civil Service 
State Authority 


11. NATION AND RACE 


11.1 
11.2 
11.3 
11.4 
11.5 
11.6 
11.7 
11.8 
11.9 
11.10 
11.11 
11.12 
11.13 
11.14 
11.15 
11.16 
11.17 
11.18 
11.19 
11.20 


The Result of Racial Mixing 

Man and Idea 

Race and Culture 

The Aryan as Founder of Culture 
Effects of Blood-Mixing 

Service to the Community 

Purest Idealism, Deepest Knowledge 
Aryan and Jew 

Consequence of Jewish Egoism 
Sham Culture of the Jews 

The Jew, a Parasite 

Jewish ‘Religious Community’ 
Jewish Religious Doctrine 

The ‘Elders of Zion’ 

The Way of Jewry 

Standing of the Factory Worker 
Jewish Tactics 

The Core of the Marxist Worldview 
Organization of Marxist World-Doctrine 
Palestine as Organizational Center 


259 
261 
262 
263 
265 
266 
268 
270 
271 
274 
275 
275 
277 
278 
279 
282 
284 
286 
287 


291 
291 
293 
294 
298 
299 
301 
302 
304 
304 
305 
307 
308 
309 
310 
318 
320 
321 
322 
325 


11.21 Dictatorship of the Proletariat 

11.22 From National Jews to Racial Jews 
11.23 Bastardized People 

11.24 Failure to Recognize the Inner Enemy 


12. THE FIRST PERIOD OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
NATIONAL SOCIALIST GERMAN WORKERS’ PARTY 

12.1 Situation after the Revolution 

12.2 Recovery of Political Power 

12.3 Winning Over the Broad Masses 

12.4 Nationalization of the Masses 

12.5 Highest Authority, Highest Responsibility 

12.6 Neither Monarchist nor Republican 

12.7 The Necessary Evil of Organization 

12.8 Inner Structure of the Movement 

12.9 Education for Struggle 

12.10 Education for Respect of the Person 

12.11 Danger of Obscurity 

12.12 The First Meeting 

12.13 Soldiers as the Basis of the Movement 

12.14 Second Meeting 

12.15 Inner Formation of the Movement 

12.16 Tin Swords and Tanned Bearskins 

12.17 Rejection of the Word ‘Folkish’ 

12.18 ‘Intellectual Weapons,’ ‘Silent Workers’ 

12.19 First Great Mass Meeting 

12.20 Pohner and Frick 

12.21 Drafting the Program 

12.22 A Movement on the March 


Appendix A: The 25 Points of the National Socialist Program 
Bibliography 


Index 


326 
327 
327 
328 


332 
333 
334 
336 
342 
343 
344 
347 
348 
349 
350 
351 
352 
354 
355 
356 
357 
358 
359 
361 
362 
362 


365 


369 


371 


MEIN KAMPF 


MEIN KAMPF: 
AN INTRODUCTION 


THOMAS DALTON 


Mein Kampf is the autobiography and articulated worldview of one of 
the most consequential and visionary leaders in world history. It is also one 
of the most maligned and least understood texts of the 20" century. There 
have been so many obfuscations, deceptions, and outright falsehoods 
circulated about this work, that one scarcely knows where to begin. 
Nonetheless, the time has come to set the story straight. 

That Adolf Hitler would even have undertaken such a work is most 
fortunate. Being neither a formal academic nor a natural writer, and being 
fully preoccupied with pragmatic matters of party-building, he may never 
have begun such a major task—were it not for the luxury of year-long jail 
term. In one of the many ironies of Hitler’s life, it took just such an adverse 
event to prompt him to dictate his party’s early history and his own life 
story. This would become volume one of his two-part, 700-page magnum 
opus. It would have a dramatic effect on world history, and initiate a chain 
of events that has yet to fully play out. In this sense, Mein Kampf is as 
relevant today as when it was first written. 

Perhaps the place to begin is with the rationale for the book. Why did 
Hitler write it at all? Clearly it was not a requirement; many major 
politicians in history have come and gone without leaving a personal 
written record. Even his time in prison could have been spent 
communicating with party leaders, building support, soliciting allies, and 
so on. But he chose to spend much of his stay documenting the origins and 
growth of his new movement. And for this we can be grateful. 


13 


MEIN KAMPE 


The work at hand seems to have served at least four purposes for its 
author. First, it is autobiographical. This aspect consumes most of the first 
two chapters, and is repeatedly woven into the remainder of volume one. 
For those curious about the first 35 years of Hitler’s life, this aspect is 
invaluable. It gives an accurate and relevant account of his upbringing, his 
education, and the early development of his worldview. Like any 
autobiography, it provides an irreplaceable first-hand description of a life. 
Butas well, it offers the usual temptation to cast events in a flattering light, 
to downplay shortcomings, or to bypass inconvenient episodes. On this 
count, Hitler fares well; he provides an honest and open life story, devoid 
of known fabrications, obvious errors, or significant omissions. This book 
is essential for understanding his thinking and attitude on social, economic, 
and political matters that are of central concern. 

Second, Mein Kampf is a kind of history lesson of Europe around the 
turn of the 20" century. Hitler was a proximate observer—and often first- 
hand witness—to many of the major events of the time. He served in the 
trenches of World War One for more than four years, which was virtually 
the entire duration of the war. Serving on the ‘losing’ side, he naturally 
gives a different interpretation of events than is commonly portrayed by 
historians of the victorious nations. But this fact should be welcomed by 
any impartial observer, and in itself makes the book worth reading. With 
rare exception—such as Jiinger’s Storm of Steel—no other contemporary 
non-fiction German source of this time is readily available in English. For 
those interested in the Great War and its immediate aftermath, this book is 
irreplaceable. 

In its third aspect, the book serves to document the origins and basic 
features of Hitler’s worldview. This, unsurprisingly, is the most distorted 
part of the book, in standard Western accounts. Here we find the insights 
and trigger events that led a young man without formal higher education, 
to develop a strikingly visionary, expansive, and forward-looking ideology. 
Hitler’s primary concern, as we read, was the future and well-being of the 
German people—all Germans, regardless of the political unit in which they 
lived. The German people, or Volk, were, he believed, a single ethnicity 
with unique and singular self-interests. They were—indisputably— 
responsible for many of the greatest achievements in Western history. They 
were among the leading lights in music, literature, architecture, science, 
and technology. They were great warriors, and great nation-builders. They 
were, in large part, the driving force behind Western civilization itself. All 
this is true and undeniable, and Hitler is justly proud of his heritage. Equally 


14 


INTRODUCTION 


is he outraged at the indignities suffered by this great people in then-recent 
decades—culminating in the disastrous humiliation of WWI and the Treaty 
of Versailles. He seeks, above all, to remedy these injustices and restore 
greatness to the German people. To do this, he needs to identify both their 
primary opponents and the defective political ideologies and structures that 
bind them. Then he undertakes to outline a new socio-political system that 
can carry them forward to a higher and rightful destiny. He accomplishes 
all this, and more. 

Finally, in its fourth aspect, Mein Kampf is a kind of blueprint for action. 
It describes the evolution and aims of National Socialism and the NSDAP, 
or Nazi Party, in compelling detail. Hitler naturally wants his new 
movement to succeed in assuming power in Germany and in a future 
German Reich. But this is no theoretical analysis. Hitler is nothing if not 
pragmatic. He has concrete goals and precise means of achieving them. He 
has nothing but disdain for the geistigen Waffen, the intellectual weapons, 
of the impotent intelligentsia. He demands results, and success. By all 
accounts, he achieved both. 

Importantly, his analysis is, in large part, independent of context. It does 
not pertain only to Germans, or only to the circumstances of the mid-1920s. 
It is a broadly universal approach based on the conditions of the modern 
world, and on humannature. As such, Hitler’s analysis of action is relevant 
and useful for many people today—for all those who might strive for 
greatness in body and spirit. 

This complex textual structure of Mein Kampf explains some of the 
complaints of modern-day critics who decry Hitler’s lack of ‘coherence’ 
or ‘narrative flow.’ He has many objectives here, and in their 
implementation, many points overlap. Perhaps he should have written four 
books, not one. Perhaps. But Hitler was a doer, not a writer. We must accept 
this fact, take what we have, and do our best to understand it in an open 
and objective fashion. He was not striving for a best-selling novel. He 
wanted to document history and a movement, and to this end he succeeded 
most admirably. 


ORIGINS AND CONTEXT 


Given that the book is, in large part, autobiographical, there is clearly 
no need to detail Hitler’s life here. Even so, a few basic facts are in order, 
to establish the context of the work. Born on 20 April 1889 in present-day 


15 


MEIN KAMPF 


Austria, Hitler grew up as a citizen of the multi-ethnic state known as the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire. This diverse amalgamation was formed in 1867, 
with the union of the Austrian and Hungarian monarchies; thus does Hitler 
refer to the state as the “Double Monarchy.” Throughout its 50-year history, 
it was always a loose conjunction of many ethnicities, and never a truly 
unified state. The ethnic Germans in it were a minority, and had to struggle 
to promote their own interests. This fact caused Hitler no end of distress; 
he explicitly felt more attachment to the broader German Volk than to the 
multi-ethnic state into which he was born. 

As a youth, his interests tended toward the arts, painting, and history. This 
led to conflict with his obstinate father, who envisioned a safe, comfortable, 
bureaucratic career for his son. But his father’s death on 3 January 1903, 
when Adolf was 13, allowed the young man to determine his own future. 
Two years later he moved to Vienna, scraping by with manual labor jobs to 
survive. In late 1907, his mother died. At the age of 18, he then applied to 
enter the Viennese arts academy in painting, but was diverted to architecture. 
He worked and studied for two more years, eventually becoming skilled 
enough to work fulltime as a draftsman and painter of watercolors. 

All the while, he studied the mass of humanity around him. He read the 
various writings and publications of the political parties. He observed the 
workings of the press. He watched how unions functioned. He sat in on 
Parliament. He followed events in neighboring Germany. And he became 
intrigued by the comings and goings of one particular Viennese minority: 
the Jews. 

Gradually he became convinced that the two dominant threats to 
German well-being were Marxism—a Jewish form of communism—and 
the international capitalist Jews. The problems were compounded by the 
fundamentally inept workings of a representative democracy that tried to 
serve diverse ethnicities. In the end, the fine and noble concept of 
democracy became nothing other than a “Jewish democracy,” working for 
the best interests of Jews instead of Austrians or Germans. 

Upon tuming 23 in 1912, Hitler went to Munich. It was his first extended 
contact with German culture, and he found it invigorating. He lived there 
for two years, until the outbreak of WWI in July 1914. Thrilled at the 
opportunity to defend the German homeland, he enlisted, serving on the 
Western front in Belgium. After more than 2 years of service, he was lightly 
wounded in October 1916 and sent back to Germany, spending some time 
in a reserve battalion in Munich. Appalled at both the role of Jews there and 
the negative public attitude, he retumed to the front in March 1917. 


16 


INTRODUCTION 


By this time, the war had been dragging on for some two and a half 
years. It had effectively become a stalemate. Even the looming entrance of 
the Americans into the war—President Wilson would call for war the next 
month, and US troops would soon follow—would have little near-term 
effect. As Hitler explains, however, the Germans actually had reasons for 
optimism by late 1917. The Central Powers (primarily Germany and 
Austria-Hungary) had inflicted a decisive defeat on Italy in the Battle of 
Caporetto, and the Russians had pulled out of the war after the Bolshevik 
revolution, thus freeing up German troops for the Western front. Hitler 
recalls that his compatriots “looked forward with confidence” to the spring 
of 1918, when they anticipated final victory. 


NOVEMBER REVOLUTION, AND A NEW MOVEMENT 


But things would turn out differently. German dissatisfaction with the 
prolonged war effort was being fanned by Jewish activists calling for mass 
demonstrations, strikes, and even revolution against the Kaiser. In late 
January 1918 there was a large munitions strike. Various workers’ actions 
and riots followed for months afterward. The Western front held, but 
Germany was weakening internally. 

In mid-October of 1918, the German front near Ypres, Belgium was hit with 
mustard gas. Hitler’s eyes were badly affected, and he was sent to a military 
hospital in Pasewalk, north of Berlin. In late October, a minor naval revolt in 
Kiel began to spread to the wider population. Two major Jewish-led parties, the 
Social Democrats (SPD) and the Independent Social Democratic Party (USPD), 
agitated for the Kaiser to abdicate—which he did, on November 9. Jewish 
activists in Berlin and Munich then declared independent “soviet” states; for a 
detailed discussion of these events, see Dalton (2014). Germany formally 
capitulated on November 11. After the dust had settled, a new ‘Weimar’ 
government was formed, one that was notably sympathetic to Jewish interests. 

Hearing about the revolution from his hospital bed, Hitler was 
devastated. All the effort and sacrifices made at the front had proven 
worthless. Jewish agitators in the homeland had succeeded in whipping up 
local dissatisfaction to the point that the Kaiser was driven from power. 
The revolutionaries then assumed power and immediately surrendered to 
the enemy. This was the infamous “stab in the back” that would haunt 
German nationalists for years to come. And it was the triggering event that 
caused Hitler to enter politics. 


17 


MEIN KAMPF 


In September 1919, working for the government, he was assigned to 
follow and report on a little-known group called the Deutsche 
Arbeiterpartei, or German Workers’ Party (DAP). He ended up joining the 
group, and quickly assumed a leadership role. By early 1920, Hitler’s 
speeches were drawing hundreds or even thousands of people. On February 
24, he announced that the party would henceforth be known as the National 
Socialist German Workers’ Party, or NSDAP—‘Nazi,’ in the parlance of 
its detractors. It is with this “first great mass meeting” that Hitler closes 
volume one of his book. 

The new movement grew rapidly. Hitler formalized his leadership in 
July 1921. A series of stormy and occasionally violent public events 
occurred in the following months. In November 1922, ideological 
compatriot Mussolini took power in Italy, which served to bolster both 
National Socialist efforts domestically and their international reputation. 
It was on November 21 that the New York Times printed its first major 
article on Hitler: “New Popular Idol Rises in Bavaria.” Calling the Nazis 
“violently anti-Semitic” and “reactionary” but “well disciplined,” the NYT 
viewed them as “potentially dangerous, though not for the immediate 
future.” Indeed—it would not be for another 10 years that they would 
assume power in Germany. 

Soon thereafter, other events would favor the National Socialists. France 
had occupied the Ruhr valley in January 1923, claiming a violation of 
Versailles; this was taken as a grave insult to German sovereignty. It was 
also at this time that the infamous German hyperinflation took hold, wiping 
out the savings of ordinary Germans and forcing them to haul around 
bushels of cash for even the smallest purchases. By the end of the year, 
Germany was in a full-blown financial crisis. This led Hitler and the 
NSDAP leadership to plan for a revolutionary take-over of Munich on 9 
November 1923. 

This attempted ‘putsch,’ or coup, would fail. In a brief shoot-out, 16 
Nazis and four policemen were killed. Hitler and the other leaders were 
arrested within days, put on trial in February 1924, and sentenced to light 
prison terms. In all, Hitler spent some 13 months in confinement, obtaining 
release in December of that year. It was during this time that he dictated 
what would become volume one of his book. 

Hitler reportedly wanted to call his new book, “Four and a Half Years 
of Struggle against Lies, Stupidity, and Cowardice.” The publisher adroitly 
suggested a shorter title: “My Struggle,” or Mein Kampf. It would initially 
be published in July of 1925. 


18 


INTRODUCTION 


Hitler then began a second, shorter volume to complete his program. 
This appeared in December of 1926. The next year, the two volumes were 
slightly revised and combined into one work. This 1927 ‘second edition’ 
of Mein Kampf, published when Hitler was 38 years old, is the version used 
in the present translation. 


CHAPTER SYNOPSES 


It will be useful at this point to provide a very brief summary of the 
main themes of each of the 27 chapters in the book. 


VOLUME ONE 

Chapter 1: In My Parents’ House. Hitler’s early life. Relationship with 
parents. Early education. Interest in history and art. Budding nationalism. 
Covers birth in 1889 to mother’s death in late 1907, when Hitler was 18 
years old. 

Chapter 2: Years of Study and Suffering in Vienna. Time alone in 
Vienna. Marxism and international Jewry as main threats. Assessment and 
critique of Viennese goverment. Life of the working class. Study of the 
Social Democratic party, and its Jewish influence. Role of unions. 
Burgeoning anti-Semitism. Study of the destructive role of Marxism. 
Chapter 3: General Political Reflections from my Time in Vienna. 
Observations on Austrian politics and representative democracy. Failings of 
multi-ethnic states. Critique of Western democracy. Failings of ‘majority rule.’ 
Demise of the pan-German movement. Unfortunate conflict with the Catholic 
Church. Anti-Semitism and religion. Covers period up to age 23 (1912). 
Chapter 4: Munich. Moves to Munich. Critique of German alliances. Four 
possible paths of German policy. Population growth, and the need for land. 
Need for alliance with England. Initial discussion of the role of Aryans. 
Marxism as mortal foe. Covers up to mid-1914. 

Chapter 5: The World War. Outbreak of World War One. Hitler enlists, 
at age 25. “Baptism by fire.” 

Chapter 6: War Propaganda. Role and need for propaganda. Effective 
use by England; failure by Germany. 

Chapter 7: The Revolution. Course of the Great War. Wounded in late 
1916. Jews and negative attitudes rampant in Munich. Munitions strike in 
early 1918. Poisoned by mustard gas in October 1918, at age 29. November 
Revolution. 


19 


MEIN KAMPF 


Chapter 8: The Beginning of my Political Activity. Postwar time in 
Munich. Need for a new party. Negative role of global capitalism. 
Chapter 9: The ‘German Workers’ Party.’ Encounters German Workers’ 
Party (DAP). Early meetings. Joins DAP, as member #7, at age 30. 
Chapter 10: Causes of the Collapse. Analysis of the collapse of the 
German Empire in 1918. Dominance of international capitalism. Effect of 
the press on the masses. Jewish control of press. Combating the syphilis 
epidemic. Cultural decay in modern art. Ineffective parliament. The army 
as a source of discipline. 

Chapter 11: Nation and Race. Detailed racial theory. Nature strives to 
improve species. Racial mixing between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ types yields 
physical, moral, and cultural decay. Aryans as true founders of civilization. 
Aryan tendency for self-sacrifice. Aryan versus Jew. Jews as parasites. Fake 
Jewish ‘religion.’ Extended examination of “the way of Jewry”—historical, 
sociological, political. Marxist worldview. Jewish subversion of 
democracy. Ill-effects of racial impurity. 

Chapter 12: The First Period of Development of the NSDAP. Evolution 
of DAP. Extended discussion of the need to nationalize the masses. How 
to organize a party. Gaining publicity. Second major meeting in October 
1919. Growing success. Rejection of ‘intellectual’ weapons. First truly 
mass meeting in February 1920. Transition to NSDAP. 


VOLUME TWO 

Chapter 1: Worldview and Party. Corruption of democracy. Concept of 
‘folkish.’ Transforming ideals into practice. Marxism pushes race equality. 
State must serve racial function: to promote the best. 

Chapter 2: The State. Three conventional concepts of state. State as means 
to end: advancing human race. Must maintain racial integrity. Strong minorities 
end up ruling. Racial mixing leads to decay. State must promote healthy 
children. Basic eugenic theory. Folkish education, for physical, mental, and 
moral strength. Promote willpower, determination, responsibility. Meritocracy. 
Chapter 3: Subjects and Citizens. Citizenship based on race. Three 
classes: citizen, subject, foreigner. 

Chapter 4: Personality and the Folkish Concept of the State. 
Aristocratic principle. Value of the individual. Marxism promotes mass 
thinking. Govemment rule by the best individuals, not majority. 

Chapter 5: Worldview and Organization. Need for an uncompromising 
worldview. Need for decisive leadership. 25-point NSDAP program is 
unshakable. Only NSDAP is truly folkish. 


20 


INTRODUCTION 


Chapter 6: Early Struggle—Significance of Speech. NSDAP must 
dominate mass opinion. Must fight against common views. Brest-Litovsk 
and Versailles. Importance of spoken word. Marxism flourished with 
speeches. Need for mass meetings. 

Chapter 7: Wrestling with the Red Front. Resumes autobiography, from 
early 1920. Lame bourgeois mass meetings. Need for publicity. Control of 
mass meetings. Violent protests. Party flag and symbol: swastika. First use 
in summer 1920. Party strength by early 1921. Mass meeting 3 Feb at 
Circus Krone. Attempted disruption. 

Chapter 8: The Strong One is Most Powerful Alone. Right of priority. 
Many folkish movements. Futility of compromise and coalition. 

Chapter 9: Basic Ideas on the Meaning and Organization of the SA. 
Three pillars of authority. In warfare, survival of the inferior. Deserters and 
Jewish revolutionaries in November 1918. Bourgeois capitulation. Need 
for a great ideal. Creation of the SA (storm troops). NSDAP is neither secret 
nor illegal. SA as trained fighters. March to Coburg in Oct 1922. French 
occupation of the Ruhr. 

Chapter 10: Federalism as a Mask. War industries in World War I. 
Bavaria versus Prussia as diversion. Kurt Eisner, Jewish revolutionary. 
Growth of anti-Semitism from 1918. Catholic versus Protestant as 
diversion. Federation versus unification. Opposition to Jewish Weimar. 
Chapter _11: Propaganda and Organization. Role of propaganda. 
Supporters and members. Need for restricted growth. Leadership principle 
versus majority rule. Acquisition of Vélkischer Beobachter. Building the 
party. Dissolution on 9 Nov 1923. 

Chapter 12: The Trade Union Question. Question of trade unions. 
Necessity of unions. NSDAP must form a union. Union in service to the 
people. Priority of worldview. 

Chapter 13: Postwar German Alliance Policy. Foreign policy as means 
for promoting national interest. Unification of German people. England 
against Germany. France against England. Need for alliance with England 
and Italy. Jews seek world conquest, racial contamination. Question of 
South Tyrol. Jews oppose German-Italian alliance. Only fascist Italy is 
opposing Jews. Jews gain power in America. 

Chapter 14: Eastern Orientation or Eastern Policy. Russia policy is 
foremost. Top priority: need for land, living space. Victory goes to the strong. 
No colonies, but only an expanded Reich. Look to the East. Russia is ruled 
by Jews, cannot be an ally. Only possible alliances: England and Italy. 
Chapter 15: The Right to Self-Defense. German submission. Locarno 


21 


MEIN KAMPF 


Treaty as further submission. France seeks to dismember Germany. War 
with France is inevitable. France occupies Ruhr, opposes England. Must 
confront and destroy Marxism. Failure of Cuno’s passive resistance. 

Even this concise summary demonstrates the controversial nature of the 
text. 


PREVIOUS ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS 


For the first several years of its existence, there was no real need for 
English publishers to produce a translation of Mein Kampf. The National 
Socialist movement was small, limited more or less to Bavaria. It had little 
prospect for growth or real power. There was simply not much interest in 
an obscure Bavarian politician. 

All this changed when the Nazis rose to national prominence in the 
1930s. Suddenly there was a need to understand this man Hitler. A British 
translator, Edgar Dugdale, undertook the initial effort to produce an English 
version in 1931. It seems that he may have had ulterior motives; his wife, 
it tums out, was a noted Zionist who was active with major British Jewish 
groups at the time (see Barnes 1980: 4). The book ended up as a highly 
abridged edition, covering only some 40 percent of the full text. It was 
eventually published in England by Hurst & Blackett, and in the US by 
Houghton-Mifflin, in late 1933. 

In 1936, the German government decided that they would sponsor their 
own, complete English translation. They hired a British writer and journalist, 
James Murphy. There not yet having been a second world war, and the worst 
excesses of Nazism still in the future, Murphy was inclined to produce a 
favorable and sympathetic translation. Apart from the present new effort, 
his is the only such sympathetic work in existence. Unfortunately, there was 
a falling out with Nazi officials and Murphy was discharged sometime in 
1938, his project incomplete. Through some obscure process, the Germans 
completed Murphy’s draft version on their own, and published it in the late 
1930s. Today this is known as the Stalag edition, and is currently available 
in print in two forms: one by Ostara Publications, and one by Elite Minds 
(the “official Nazi English translation”). To call this version ‘unpolished’ is 
an understatement; more below. 

By 1939, four new versions had appeared. After his dismissal, Murphy 
returned to England and revised and completed his translation, which was 
published by Hurst & Blackett. This is ‘the’ Murphy translation; it is widely 


22 


INTRODUCTION 


available on the Internet, and through various reprints. Under the 
Hutchinson imprint, the Murphy translation was republished in 1969 with 
a lengthy and hostile introduction by British historian D. C. Watt. 

Secondly, the British firm Reynal & Hitchcock enlisted a team of 
people, headed by Alvin Johnson, to do their own translation. It was notably 
hostile to the content of the book and the National Socialist movement 
generally. Barnes (1980: 85), for example, cites one knowledgeable source: 
“Alvin Johnson...was an ardent opponent of Adolf Hitler.” 

Third, an American publisher, Stackpole Sons, produced a version under 
the direction of a Jewish editor, William Soskin. They hired a Jewish 
socialist, Ludwig Lore, to write the preface. Unsurprisingly, this too was a 
hostile effort. Soskin was successfully sued by Houghton-Mifflin for 
copyright infringement, and production was halted after only a few months. 

The final work of 1939 was a second abridgment, produced by 
American journalist—and future senator—Alan Cranston. Cranston was 
also sued; he too lost, but not before allegedly selling several hundred 
thousand copies. 

Dissatisfied with the abridged Dugdale translation, Houghton-Mifflin 
embarked on a new, full translation, entrusted to Jewish-German writer 
Ralph Manheim. They also solicited a short introduction by a Jewish- 
German journalist, Konrad Heiden. As expected, it was another blatantly 
hostile production. The book appeared in 1943, and has been continuously 
in print since then. To the present day, the Manheim version functions as 
the ‘official’ translation of Mein Kampf; it is the one quoted by nearly all 
academics and journalists. The latest Houghton edition, issued in 1998, 
includes an introduction by notorious Jewish Zionist Abraham Foxman. 
Clearly, little has changed in the intervening years. 

For several decades, these were the extant English translations. Then in 
2009, an unknown businessman, Michael Ford, produced his own self- 
published translation through Elite Minds. This edition has several 
shortcomings, as explained below. 

Something of the flavor of these efforts can be seen in the very first words 
of the book. In the present translation, Chapter 1 is titled “In My Parents’ 
House.” (Original: Jm Elternhaus.) The first sentence: “I consider it most 
fortunate today that destiny selected Braunau-on-the-Inn to be my birthplace.” 
(Als gliickliche Bestimmung gilt es mir heute, dass das Schicksal mir zum 
Geburtsort gerade Braunau am Inn zuwies.) By contrast, the table below gives 
the chapter title and the first few words, in the various translations. 


23 


MEIN KAMPF 


TRANSLATION CHAPTER 1 INITIAL WORDS 


Dugdale My Home It stands me in good stead today that Fate... 
Johnson At Home Today | consider it my good fortune that Fate... 
Murphy (‘Stalag’) My Home To-day | consider it a good omen that destiny... 
Murphy (‘standard’) In the Home of It has turned out fortunate for me to-day that destiny... 
my Parents 
Manheim In the House of Today it seems to me providential that Fate... 
my Parents 
Soskin Childhood Home _ Today | regard it as a happy change that Fate... 
Ford Childhood Home _ Today, | am pleased that Fate chose the city... 


The variability of even this simple leading sentence is striking. One can 
imagine the issues involved with the many more complicated thoughts that 
follow. 


WHY A NEW TRANSLATION? 


As it happens, every one of the previous translations has major problems 
and disadvantages, for a modern English reader. 

The two primary versions—Murphy and Manheim—are written in the 
style of early 20" century British writers. They use a wide array of archaic 
‘British-isms’ and British spellings that make reading awkward. Worse, 
they attempt to follow too literally Hitler’s original style. Like most 
Germans of the time, Hitler wrote long sentences, fashioned into long, 
complex paragraphs. Manheim follows this style religiously, to the 
detriment of the reader; Murphy at least occasionally breaks up long 
sentences into more readable segments. 

Worst of all, both major translations are simply poor efforts. They do 
not read well. One repeatedly encounters passages that are awkward, 
incoherent, or incomprehensible. There is little of the fluidity and lyrical 
power of the German original. For his part, Murphy takes a considerable 
amount of ‘translator’s license,’ interjecting unwarranted terminology and 
wording, or simply leaving things out. Manheim is more literal, but in the 
end is scarcely more readable. The reader simply needs to scan a sampling 
of either text to understand the situation. 


24 


INTRODUCTION 


This is unfortunate, to say the least. It is almost as if the publishers 
intended, or at least preferred, that the translations be difficult to read. 
Certainly this limits the circulation of Hitler’s ideas, and makes it easier to 
dismiss them—a convenient situation, for the book’s many critics. 

With the exception of Murphy, all of the standard editions betray their 
intentions with aggressive, hostile, and slanderous comments in their 
introductions. Consider this selection of remarks: 


Johnson: Hitler is “no artist in literary expression,” and “often indifferent to 
grammar and syntax.” The book is “a propagandistic essay by a violent partisan” 
that “warps historical truth” or “ignores it completely.” Hitler’s discussions on 
race can be safely dismissed, because “the greatest anthropologists of the 20° 
century are agreed that ‘race’ is a practically meaningless word.” 


Lore: “I cannot conceive of any book of which I more positively disapprove.” 
The book has an “atrocious style” and “countless contradictions.” In essence, 
it is “an outpouring of willful perversion, clumsy forgery, vitriolic hatred, 
and violent denunciation.” 


Manheim: Hitler is a “paranoiac” who offers us “disjointed facts” and 
“largely unintelligible flights of Wagnerian fantasy.” He creates “a dream- 
world,” one “without color and movement.” 


Heiden: Mein Kampf was written “in white-hot hatred.” It is “ill-founded, 
undocumented, and badly written.” “The book may well be called a kind 
of satanic Bible.” 


Watt: The book is “lengthy, dull, bombastic, repetitious and extremely 
badly written.” “Most of its statements of fact...are demonstrably untrue.” 
It yields “an intolerably prolix German style and a total lack of any 
intellectual precision.” As a work of political philosophy, “it has no claims 
whatever to be taken seriously.” Hitler’s racial theory—a “mystical racist 
mumbo-jumbo of Aryanism”—is a “revolting mixture of pseudo-science 
and bogus historicism.” The work is self-consistent, but this only betrays 
“the terrible consistency of the insane.” In the end, Hitler is nothing more 
than a “master of the inept, the undigested, the half-baked and the untrue.” 


Foxman: Hitler’s “theories have long since been discredited.” The book is 
“a work of ugliness and depravity.” It is “unreliable as a source of historical 


25 


MEIN KAMPF 


data,” full of “lies, omissions, and half-truths.” The book’s “atrocious style, 
puerile digressions, and narcissistic self-absorption” are obvious. Its theories 
are “extremist, immoral, and seem to promise war.” Hitler’s “lunatic plan” 
is “absurd” and even “comical.” All in all, “a ridiculous tract.” 


Any translator, editor, or publisher who would include such words can 
hardly be trusted to do an honest job. The intent to bias the reader is plain. 
Certainly there is no concern here for the author to obtain a fair and 
objective reading. In fact, precisely the opposite. 

The recent Ford translation, while not overtly hostile, has several other 
major flaws. Ford has no discernible credentials, no publishing record, nor 
any documented history with such academic works. His ‘in text’ notes are 
awkward and distracting. The book includes many amateurish and cartoonish 
‘photos.’ There is no index. And his so-called publishing house, Elite Minds, 
appears to be some kind of environmental group that focuses on the ecology 
of sharks, of all things: This is unfortunate; the last thing the public needs is 
another misleading, ill-conceived, and unqualified version of Mein Kampf. 

The ‘Nazi’ or ‘Stalag’ edition of Murphy has its own problems. The 
version published by Elite Minds claims to be authentic, which means that 
they retained all the original flaws of grammar, punctuation, and spelling. 
The result is nearly unreadable. The Ostara edition fixes many of these 
problems, but still reads poorly. It does break up the long paragraphs, but 
to an extreme degree; one typically finds single-sentence paragraphs, as in 
a newspaper. This move destroys all flow and connection of ideas. And 
neither version has an index or explanatory footnotes. 


BENEFITS OF THE NEW TRANSLATION 


The present work addresses and resolves many of these unfortunate 
drawbacks. 

Section headings have been added, in text, in bold. The German original 
employed such headings, but only at the top of each page. The reader thus 
never knew where a new section actually began. These headings have been 
translated and inserted at the appropriate points, directly in the text. This 
simple change greatly improves readability, by clearly organizing the 
narrative and breaking up long textual passages. 

Much emphasis has been placed here on readability, without sacrificing 
accuracy. The English text reads smoothly and naturally. Also, numerous 


26 


INTRODUCTION 


contractions have been employed: it’s, I’m, isn’t, and so on. This again 
improves readability, and more closely matches the first-person ‘dictation’ 
style of the original. 

Finally, the book has helpful and relevant footnotes, a useful index, and 
a bibliography of relevant secondary source material. 


SOME CONTENTIOUS TOPICS 


It goes without saying that this book is controversial. In fact, it may well 
be named as the single most controversial book in history. As such, the 
typical person is more or less guaranteed to get a slanted and biased account 
of it, if he knows much about it at all. And this is the first point of note: 
few people, even the so-called experts, really know what’s in this book. 
Even highly educated people can tell you almost nothing about it. They 
will recognize the title and author, of course, and perhaps know roughly 
when it was written. But little more. The book has been functionally 
censored in the West for decades. And when academics or journalists are 
compelled to address it, it is always in slanderous and defamatory terms. 
This is the clearest demonstration that something important is happening 
in this text—something that most would rather leave unknown. 

Of Hitler’s many controversial statements and topics, four subjects warrant 
a brief mention here: National Socialism, race theory, religion, and the Jews. 

Ofthe many simplistic and overused hyperboles in the modern lexicon, 
the use of ‘Nazi’ surely ranks among the worst. It’s a crude and almost 
comical synonym for evil, hateful, cruel, tyrannical, and so on. This is 
consistent with the general demonization of everything Hitler. 

‘Nazi’ is, of course, an abbreviation for National Socialist 
(Nationalsozialist). It was prompted by an earlier term, ‘Sozi,’ which was 
short for Sozialdemokrat, referring to the Social Democrat party that had 
been in existence since the mid-1800s. Hitler and colleagues rarely used 
‘Nazi,’ generally viewing it as derogatory—although Goebbels did write 
an essay and short book titled The Nazi-Sozi. 

As an ideology, National Socialism is utterly misunderstood. In fact, 
surprisingly, many people around the world today implicitly endorse some 
form of it. Take socialism. Most European countries, and many others 
globally, are some form of socialist. Socialism—loosely defined as 
government control and oversight of at least certain key portions of the 
economic sector—stands in contrast to free market capitalism, in which 


27 


MEIN KAMPF 


for-profit corporations control such things. Suffice it to say that socialism 
is arespected political and economic system around the globe. 

Nationalism places high priority on the well-being of the nation-state 
and its traditional residents. It is inward-looking, rather than outward. It 
tends toward economic independence and autonomy rather than 
globalization and inter-connectedness. It typically supports and strengthens 
the dominant ethnicity and culture, and devalues that of minorities. This, 
too, is hardly controversial; there are strong nationalist movements in many 
countries around the world today. 

As it happens, the United States is neither nationalist nor socialist. Thus, 
its media and its economic and political elite tend to dismiss or abuse both 
of these concepts. Americans are functionally brainwashed to believe that 
socialism is evil—witness the mindless attacks against President Obama 
in recent years—and that nationalism is the hallmark of crude and primitive 
autocrats, and racist as well. This fact is revealing; American power elite 
want no one to get the idea that anything like nationalism or socialism— 
or, God forbid, national socialism—should become a credible ideology. 

Now, it is true that Hitler’s form of national socialism went further than 
these basic concepts. It explicitly targeted Marxists, Jews, and global capitalists 
as enemies of the German people. It also sought to replace representative 
democracy with a more efficient and accountable centralized governance. 
Hitler had rational arguments for all these issues, as he explains in his book. 

In fact, the formal declaration of the National Socialist system—as 
stated in Hitler’s “25 points” (shown in Appendix A)—is remarkably 
progressive and, dare we say, tame. They call for equal rights (points 2 and 
9). They give citizens the right to select the laws and governmental 
structure (6). They abolish war-profiteering (12). They call for corporate 
profit-sharing with employees (14). They support retirement pensions, a 
strong middle class, free higher education, public health, maternity welfare, 
and religious freedom, including explicit support for “a positive 
Christianity” (15, 16, 20, 21, 24, respectively). 

On the ‘down’ side, only a relative few points appear threatening or 
aggressive. They grant citizenship only to ethnic Germans, explicitly 
denying it to Jews (4). They block further immigration, and compel recent 
immigrants to leave (8). They seek to prohibit all financial speculation in 
land (17). They call for a death penalty against “traitors, usurers, and 
profiteers” (18). They demand that the German-language press be controlled 
only by ethnic Germans—without restricting press in other languages (23). 
And they call for “a strong central authority in the state” (25). 


28 


INTRODUCTION 


As anti-Semitic as Hitler was, it is surprising how lightly the Jews get 
off. They are banned from citizenship, and therefore from any role in 
govemment or the press. Recent (since August 1914) Jewish immigrants, 
like all immigrants, must leave. And the National Socialist view of religious 
freedom “fights against the Jewish materialist spirit” (24). But no threats 
to imprison or kill Jews. Longtime Jewish residents can stay in the country. 
No confiscation of wealth, with the stated exceptions. And certainly nothing 
that sounds like a looming ‘Holocaust.’ 

In sum, Hitler’s ‘Nazism’ is essentially the product of German 
nationalism and progressive socialism, combined with a mild form of anti- 
Semitism. Hardly the embodiment of evil. 


RACIAL THEORY 


Mein Kampf contains numerous references to ‘blood’ (Blut) and ‘race’ 
(Rasse). This is always portrayed in the worst possible terms, as some kind 
of demonic, hate-filled, blind racism. But we must first realize that such 
talk was commonplace in the early 20" century; Hitler’s terminology, 
though odd-sounding today, was actually quite conventional at the time. 
Not being a scientist, and few having much understanding of genetics at 
the time, it is understandable that he would employ such widely-used terms. 

Therefore, a literal interpretation of such words is misleading. In modern 
terminology, Hitler’s ‘race’ is better viewed as ‘ethnicity.’ He was more an 
ethnicist than a racist. His call for justice for the “German race” is really 
on behalf of ethnic Germans—the Volk. Thus understood, his view is much 
less threatening than commonly portrayed. Yes, he viewed ethnic Germans 
as superior. Yes, he wanted the best for his people. Yes, he was not much 
interested in the welfare of minorities or other nationalities. This is hardly 
a sin. Many people around the world today fight for precisely such things, 
for their own ethnicities. And they are right to do so. 

Even today, it is reasonable and appropriate to discuss issues of race. It is a 
relevant term in biological taxonomy, indicating the highest-level sub-grouping 
within the species Homo sapiens. By some accounts, there are three races: 
White/Caucasian, Black/Negroid, and Mongoloid/Asian. Within each race, we 
have the various ethnicities—of which there are some 5,000 worldwide. 

By this measure, Hitler cared little about race. He made a few dismissive 
comments about Blacks, but nothing that wasn’t standard at the time. He 
actually admired certain people of the Asian race, especially the Japanese. 


29 


MEIN KAMPF 


But his primary concern was among the various White ethnicities. He 
sought a position of strength and influence for ethnic Germans; he sought 
alliances with ethnic Britons; and he sought to oppose ethnic Jews. He was 
an ethnicist, not a racist. 

Then there is Hitler’s infamous talk of ‘Aryan.’ Apart from passing mention 
elsewhere in the book, it is discussed in detail only in chapter 11. While there 
is no talk of any ‘superman’—no reference to Nietzsche’s Ubermensch, for 
example—tt is clear that Hitler views the Aryan as the highest human type, 
the greatest ethnicity, mover and creator of civilization. Notably, he never 
defines Aryan. Rather, we learn only what the Aryan is not: he is not Black, 
not Oriental, and certainly not Jewish. The Jew is the anti-Aryan, his dark and 
corrupting counterpart. The Aryan builds, the Jew destroys. The Aryan 
produces, the Jew consumes. The Aryan is idealistic, the Jew materialistic. 

In the end, the Aryan is distinguished not by his superior intelligence, 
nor his great creativity, but mainly by his altruism: the Aryan is a self- 
sacrificing person, more willing than any others to work on behalf of 
society. Thus he builds civilization and culture, and spreads it to the world. 
Non-Aryans, to the extent that they have a culture, get it from the Aryans, 
even as they customize it to their own needs. But the original source and 
sustainer is the self-sacrificing Aryan. 

The word ‘Aryan’ has an interesting origin, incidentally, and it has 
nothing to do with Hitler or the Germans. It comes from the Sanskrit arya, 
meaning ‘noble.’ It originally referred to the people and language that moved 
into India from the north, around 1500 BC. In the Indian caste system, the 
Aryans became the Brahmans—the highest and noblest caste. It was they 
who cultivated the Sanskrit language, and ultimately developed Indian 
culture. And a final point of interest: Those immigrants from the north came 
from the region that is known today as the Iranian plateau. In fact, the word 
‘Iran’ derives directly from ‘Aryan’; the Iranians were the original Aryans. 

Not being a scholar of ancient history, and having no Internet at hand, 
Hitler knew little of all this. He simply picked up on prior German and 
European usage. In fact, talk of Aryans as a superior race predated Hitler 
by several decades. It was a main theme of Frenchman Arthur de 
Gobineau’s book Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races, of 1855. 
And it was prominent in Briton-turned-German author Houston 
Chamberlain’s book Foundations of the Nineteenth Century, published in 
1899. By the time Hitler cited the term, it was old hat. 


30 


INTRODUCTION 


ON RELIGION 


Among other calumnies, Hitler is often portrayed as a godless atheist, a 
devil worshipper, the antichrist, or some kind of maniacal pagan. In fact 
he was none of these. 

Rather, Hitler was broadly supportive of Christianity. He called it “the 
Religion of Love,” and referred to Jesus, indirectly, as its “sublime founder” 
(volume 1, chapter 8). He argued that the masses are not and cannot be 
philosophical; their ethics must come from traditional religious sources. 
And he believed in separation of church and state: “political parties have 
no right to meddle in religious questions” (chapter 10). In chapter 11, he 
condemned the Jews because they mock religion, and portray ethics and 
morality as “antiquated sentiment.” 

His view on God is quite intriguing. Frequently he refers to a kind of 
cosmic deity or divine power, but in a variety of unconventional terms. We 
find many references, for example, to Schicksal—fate or destiny. In chapter 
5 we read of the “Goddess of Destiny” (Schicksalgéttin). In chapter 7 he 
writes of “Providence” (Vorsehung), “Doom” or “Fate” (Verhdngnis), and 
“the Lord” (Herrn). Elsewhere we find reference to “Chance” (Zufall) and 
“the eternal Creator”. (ewigen Schdpfer). Volume one closes with a reference 
to “the Goddess of Inexorable Vengeance” (die Géttin der unerbittlichen 
Rache). These are not mere metaphors. It seems to be a kind of recognition 
of higher powers in the cosmos, but not those of traditional religions. 

In the end, Hitler was most appalled by crude materialism: the quest for 
money and material power. This view has no concept of idealism, no notion 
of spirituality, no vision of higher powers in the universe. Materialism was 
the essence of both Marxism and capitalism—and both were embodied in 
the Jew. That’s why these things are the mortal enemy of anyone seeking 
higher aims in life. 

Hitler himself was no fan of religious dogma, but seems to have 
envisioned a future that moved toward a new kind of spirituality, one aligned 
with the workings of nature. We may perhaps best view him as a ‘spiritual 
but not religious’ sort of person—a view that is notably widespread today. 


ON THE JEWS 


If nothing else, Hitler is inevitably depicted as a confessed anti-Semite 
and Jew-hater. We should be clear: this is absolutely true. There are many 


31 


MEIN KAMPF 


lies spread about Hitler, but this is not one of them. The key is understanding 
why he held this view. 

In the second half of chapter 2, he describes in striking detail his gradual 
discovery of the role and effect of Jews in society. He recalls that, as a 
youth, he had known only one Jewish boy, but had no particular feelings 
toward him one way or the other. He hadn’t even heard them discussed 
much until his mid-teens, and then only in a vaguely negative political 
context. When he moved to Vienna at age 15, he encountered a city of 2 
million that was 10 percent Jewish. At first, he barely noticed them. When 
he did, he viewed them as representatives of a rather strange religion, but 
since he was generally tolerant of religious diversity, he gave them little 
thought. He was initially put off by the “anti-Semitic” press. As he says, 
“on grounds of human tolerance, I opposed the idea that [the Jew] should 
be attacked because he had a different faith.” 

But then Hitler began to pay attention to the mainstream press. They 
were informative and liberal, but yet often flamboyant and garish. They 
seemed anxious to curry favor with the corrupt monarchy. And they were 
uniformly critical of the German Kaiser and his people. He noticed that 
some of the anti-Semitic papers were actually more skeptical of Viennese 
authority, and more open-minded regarding the Germans. At the same time, 
he realized that the Jews were more numerous than he previously believed. 
In fact, certain districts of Vienna were 50 percent Jewish, or more. And 
they all seemed to endorse a strange ideology: Zionism. 

Furthermore, they were visually and physically repellent. Their black 
caftans and braided hair locks looked comical. They had their own odd 
concept of ‘cleanliness’: “That they were not water-lovers was obvious 
upon first glance.” They smelled bad: “The odor of those people in caftans 
often made me sick to my stomach.” This was topped off by “the unkempt 
clothes and the generally ignoble appearance.” All in all, a sorry sight. 

Worst of all, hidden away inside, was their “moral rot.” Jews seemed to 
be involved in all manner of shady, unethical, and illegal activities. Hitler 
began to study the situation in more detail. “The fact was that 90 percent 
of all the filthy literature, artistic trash, and theatrical idiocy had to be 
charged to the account of a people who formed scarcely one percent of the 
nation. This fact could not be denied.” Pornography, lewd art and theater, 
prostitution, human trafficking...all could be tied to the Jews. 

The famed mainstream Viennese press, Hitler discovered, was almost 
completely a Jewish enterprise. Jewish writers repeatedly praised Jewish 
actors, authors, and businessmen. People, events, and policies favorable to 


32 


INTRODUCTION 


Jews were lauded, and those that were disadvantageous were condemned. 
Even the dominant political party, the Social Democrats, was found to be 
led by Jews. Upon this realization, says Hitler, “the scales fell from my 
eyes.” The whole pattern came together: a Jewish press supporting a Jewish 
political system, even as other Jews profited from the moral corruption of 
the people. Profit and power at all cost; lies and deceit without 
compunction; and an utter lack of concern for fairness, democracy, human 
welfare, or even human decency. “I gradually came to hate them,” he said. 

Considered globally, the situation was even worse. Marxism—the 
product of a Jew, Karl Marx—was promulgated by Jews in Europe and 
around the world. It sought to dominate and control both human and natural 
realms. It sought to level all social differences, thereby subverting the 
natural order in which the truly best people rightly flourish. In essence, it 
was a teaching and a means by which Jews could ruthlessly assume control 
of entire nations. Once that happened, thousands or even millions of natives 
would die. The 1917 Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was proof enough. 

In other parts of Europe, the dominant ideology was capitalism. Here, 
money ruled. Here, the bankers and corporate moguls dictated even to 
kings. Markets must be opened, international trade promoted, and loans 
used to extract wealth from the masses. And when these titans of capital 
were investigated, they were found to be, more often than not, Jews. 

For Hitler, these realizations were devastating. The recognition of the 
insidious role of the Jews was “the greatest inner revolution that I had yet 
experienced.” Indeed: “From being a soft-hearted cosmopolitan, I became 
an out-and-out anti-Semite.” No hidden views here. 

Hitler’s conversion to anti-Semitism was remarkable. In contrast to the 
common view, it was neither arbitrary nor irrational. He was not a born 
Jew-hater. It was a step-by-step process, taken over a long period of time, 
and based on actual data and observations about the real world. His was a 
rational anti-Semitism. Any person of dignity and self-respect, anyone with 
a concern for human life, anyone committed to the integrity of the natural 
world, will of necessity be an anti-Semite. In their ruthless pursuit of their 
own self-interest, Jews become the enemy of all mankind. Anyone not 
recognizing this fact—and acting accordingly—is a fool. 

The modern person today winces at such talk. “A monster!” we say. 
“Hate speech!” “The devil!” And yet, these are not rational responses. The 
modern man is conditioned to say such things. We must be objective here. 
Hitler was not inventing facts. His observations were largely true, even if 
he had no access to formal data or statistics. Jews did dominate in Vienna, 


33 


MEIN KAMPF 


and even more so in Germany. Consider the following numbers, cited by 
orthodox researcher Sarah Gordon (1984: 8-15): 


The reader may be surprised to learn that Jews were never a 
large percentage of the total German population; at no time 
did they exceed 1.09 percent of the population during the 
years 1871 to 1933... [In spite of this, Jews] were 
overrepresented in business, commerce, and public and 
private service... Within the fields of business and commerce, 
Jews... represented 25 percent of all individuals employed in 
retail business and handled 25 percent of total sales...; they 
owned 41 percent of iron and scrap iron firms and 57 percent 
of other metal businesses.... Jews were [also] prominent in 
private banking under both Jewish and non-Jewish ownership 
or control. They were especially visible in private banking in 
Berlin, which in 1923 had 150 private (versus state) Jewish 
banks, as opposed to only 11 private non-Jewish banks.... 


This trend held true in the academic and cultural spheres as well: “Jews 
were overrepresented among university professors and students between 
1870 and 1933.... [A]lmost 19 percent of the instructors in Germany were 
of Jewish origin.... Jews were also highly active in the theater, the arts, 
film, and journalism. For example, in 1931, 50 percent of the 234 theater 
directors in Germany were Jewish, and in Berlin the number was 80 
percent...” Hitler was not imaging things. 

Furthermore, Jews did in fact curry favor with the monarchy when it 
was in their interest, but they were quick to revolt if that could yield a 
greater gain. Jewish Marxists had succeeded in Russia, and were prominent 
in the November Revolution in Germany, making them responsible, in part, 
for Germany’s defeat in WWI. In sum, Jews were eager to profit by any 
means possible: war, corruption, immorality, exploitation, deception. And 
they were, for the most part, fanatical Zionists: committed to creating a 
Jewish state in Palestine, and willing to do whatever it took to achieve this. 

The facts are what they are. We can pretend they don’t exist, but then 
we only deceive ourselves. Worse: we surrender our future to ruthless Jews, 
who are only too happy to manipulate and exploit. A nation’s failure to 
appreciate the profound importance of ‘the Jewish Question’ can only lead 
to its downfall. Chapter 11 of the first volume includes a lengthy and 
detailed analysis of precisely this situation. 


34 


INTRODUCTION 


What to do? For Hitler, there was only one logical conclusion: Drive 
them out. This meant pushing them out of society, out of the economy, and 
restoring control of the media and government to non-Jews. It meant 
creating a Judenrein, or Jew-free, society, one that was free from internal 
and external manipulation by Jewish interests. This, in fact, was Hitler’s 
conclusion years before he began Mein Kampf. In late 1919, as he was just 
becoming acquainted with the DAP party, he wrote a letter to one of his 
officers regarding how to respond to the Jewish question. This striking early 
letter concludes as follows: 


Rational anti-Semitism...must lead to a systematic and legal 
struggle against, and eradication of, the privileges the Jews 
enjoy over the other foreigners living among us (Alien 
Laws). Its final objective, however, must be the total 
removal of all Jews (die Entfernung der Juden tiberhaupt) 
from our midst. Both objectives can only be achieved by a 
govemment of national strength, never by a govemment of 
national impotence. (in Maser 1974: 215) 


His view did not change in Mein Kampf, nor evidently anytime later in 
his life. His solution was always the same: drive them out. Total removal. 
Ruthlessly if necessary, but out they must go. 

Here is an important point, however: With one minor exception, Hitler 
never called for killing the Jews. Though his terminology shifted over time, 
his words always referred to some form of removal. Jews should be 
“deported,” “expelled,” “rooted out.” Their role and their power in the 
German Reich must be “destroyed” or “liquidated.” But explicit words like 
‘killing,’ ‘shooting,’ ‘murder,’ ‘gassing,’ virtually never appear in his 
speeches, writings, or even private conversations. Even the hostile 
commentator Ian Kershaw had to admit as much, at least regarding the 
public addresses: “An explicit call to murder [Jews] can be found in 
no...speech” (1998: 650). Kershaw fails to inform the reader, though, that 
the same holds for Hitler’s writings and conversations. 

The one exception is at the very end of Mein Kampf. There were about 
600,000 Jews in Germany at the start of WWI, a war that ended in the 
deaths of over 2 million Germans. Hitler argues that killing “12 or 15 
thousand Hebrew corrupters” at the start of the war, by the same poison 
gas that fell on the German troops in the battlefield, would have spared a 
million lives and led to German victory. Not all the Jews, or even most of 


35 


MEIN KAMPF 


them; just one or two percent would have sufficed, to subvert their 
pernicious aims. But this seems to be his last such reference, in any 
documented writing or speech. In a sense, this exception proves the rule: 
If Hitler had wanted to speak of killing the Jews, he surely would have. 
Since we find no such talk after 1925—even during the war—we must 
assume that he in fact never intended their deaths. 

The two most contentious words that Hitler used regarding the Jews 
were ausrotten and vernichten. English sources always translate these as 
intent to “exterminate,” “destroy,” or “annihilate” the Jews; but this is 
another deception. None of his actual words demands mass killing—or 
even any killing at all. If the Jews have been driven out of Germany, they 
have indeed been ‘exterminated?’ (lit. ‘driven beyond the border’). If their 
control over the economy has been terminated, their power has indeed been 
‘annihilated,’ or ‘brought to nothing.’ If Jewish society has been removed, 
it may rightly be said to have been ‘destroyed’ (lit. ‘un-built’ or 
‘deconstructed’). Hitler’s tough talk was never any different than that of 
any world leader when confronting a mortal enemy. President Obama often 
spoke of “destroying” the “cancer” of the Islamic State, but no one accused 
him of attempted genocide. 

Thus, we find no talk of mass murder, extermination camps, genocide, 
or anything like this in Mein Kampf. Hitler’s opponents search in vain for 
signs of an impending ‘Holocaust.’ The reader is invited to do the same. It 
is simply not there—much to the chagrin of his critics. 

From all this, it should be clear that Hitler had only one real enemy in 
the Jews. He was not some all-purpose hater of humanity. He disliked the 
French, respected the British and Americans, and sympathized with the 
Russians, but didn’t hate them. Even the lesser races were never a target of 
contempt, but rather, if anything, pity. Today we are under the impression 
that, in 1940, the entire world quivered at the thought of a Nazi takeover. 
But this was never more than trumped-up propaganda. 

In short, unless you were a Jew, you had nothing to fear. Whites had nothing 
to fear—unless they allowed themselves to be ruled by Jewish Marxists or 
Jewish capitalists. Hispanics, Blacks, and Orientals, though of lower status, 
had nothing to fear. France and England had nothing to fear—until they 
declared war on Germany. America never had anything to fear—until 
Roosevelt andhis Jewish advisors made the unwise decision to harass Germany 
and Japan into conflict. It was always and only the Jews who were his enemy. 

From the Jewish perspective, of course, this is the ultimate evil: a man 
who seeks to destroy Jewish power, confiscate their obscene wealth, and 


36 


INTRODUCTION 


create a Jew-free society. Should he succeed, and should his new society 
flourish, it would mean catastrophe for Jews worldwide. People everywhere 
would see the pernicious result of Jewish control. People everywhere might 
also attempt to regain their own self-determination, drive out their own 
Jews, and create their own flourishing society. And that would be the end 
of Jewish power globally. For the Jews, this is a nightmare scenario. Thus 
they use all their might to oppose it. 
This is why Mein Kampf is so dangerous. 


HITLER’S LEGACY 


Hitler had a great and noble vision for his German people. He 
desperately wanted them to assume their rightful place in the world, and 
to set an example for all those who aspired to something better than a 
crude material existence. By contrast, the social vision of virtually every 
other world leader pales to insignificance. The ideals of Bush, Blair, 
Cameron, Sarkozy, Hollande, Merkel, Obama, Trump...these are bad 
jokes, at best. But this is what we must expect, given their obeisance to 
Jewish interests. 

Hitler had concrete goals in mind for his nation, and concrete plans to 
get there. He faced three fundamental challenges: (1) to restore the 
economy, (2) to achieve security and independence by becoming a world 
power, and (3) to create an idealistic, uplifting, and sustainable German 
society. He put his plan into action as soon as he came to power in 1933. 
And it worked. It worked so well that a beleaguered, beaten-down, hyper- 
inflated, emasculated German nation rose up to become a world power with 
astonishing speed. Consider: After just three years, Hitler’s Germany had 
conquered inflation, driven down unemployment, and put industry back to 
work—all in the midst of a global depression. After six years, it was a world 
power. After eight years, his nation was so powerful that it took the 
combined effort of virtually the rest of the world to defeat it. 

The firsttwo aspects of his plan were attained. Buttherest of the world, 
driven by Jewish hatred, jealousy, and spite, could not bear this, and so 
they sought to crush him and his German nation—which they did. The real 
tragedy of Hitler’s story is that he never had time to tackle his third great 
challenge: to create a flourishing German society. Sadly, we will never 
know the long-term consequences of National Socialism, or whether a truly 
great society could have been constructed. 


37 


MEIN KAMPF 


But what about the Holocaust? What about the death camps and gas 
chambers? Isn’t this the terrible, inevitable outcome of Hitler’s warped vision? 

Here we have perhaps the greatest deception of all. In order to show the 
world the horrible outcome of a potent anti-Semitism, a tale of monumental 
human disaster had to be constructed. Once constructed, it then had to be 
promoted and sustained. The undeniable and tragic death of several 
hundred thousand Jews—which included many deaths by old age, disease, 
injury, suicide, and in combat situations—would have to become “6 
million.” Tough talk against Jews, aimed at driving them out of Germany, 
would have to become “euphemisms for mass murder.” Rooms designed 
to disinfest clothing and bedding against disease-carrying lice would have 
to become “homicidal gas chambers.” Hundreds of thousands of Jewish 
bodies would have to be burned down to ash, and then made to completely 
vanish. Transit camps constructed to move Jews out of the Reich— 
Treblinka, Belzec, Sobibor—would have to become “extermination camps” 
designed for mass-murder; and with diesel engine exhaust, no less. And a 
forced labor camp in which thousands of Jews died from typhus— 
Auschwitz—would have to become “the greatest death camp of all time.” 

Clearly there is much more to be said here. For those interested readers, 
sources such as Dalton (2014b, 2015) or Rudolf (2011) are recommended. 
Suffice to say that the Holocaust, as commonly portrayed, is an 
unsubstantiated, unwarranted, and unjustified exaggeration of epic 
proportions. Nearly every aspect of the story crumbles as soon as it is put 
to the test. The alleged horror of the Holocaust becomes, in the end, a story 
of the dismantling and expulsion of one particular minority community that 
held disproportionate power in a nation that did not want them, and that 
bore disproportionate guilt for that nation’s misfortunes. That they 
themselves should have suffered as a result is unsurprising. 


READING MEIN KAMPF 


Two final things should be kept in mind by any contemporary reader of 
this book. First, the obvious point: the writer did not know the future. It is 
very difficult forus, knowing history, to imagine these words being written 
by a 38-year-old leader of a minor political party who could not have known 
what was to come. Hitler had visions, ideas, expectations—which turned 
out to be stunningly accurate. His powers of perception and foresight were 
astonishing. And yet for him, at the time, they were just thoughts of a 


38 


INTRODUCTION 


possible future. He believed that his NSDAP party would grow to dominate 
Germany—and it did. He believed that he could restore greatness to a 
shattered nation—and he did. Conflict with Russia, France, and England; 
tackling the ‘Jewish Question’; a reinvigorated cultural and spiritual life— 
all these came about, more or less as he anticipated. And the engine behind 
these events was just as he envisioned: sheer force of will, by a single man. 

Did he foresee a world united against him? The loss of some 4 million 
German lives? His own premature death? Apparently not. But surely he 
must have known that such things were possible. In a world of perpetual 
struggle, no victories are guaranteed. Success is always ephemeral. Striving 
for greatness always entails great risk. And yet the alternative is worse— 
to sink into a miasmatic existence, a placid and tepid peace, in which the 
global capitalists or communists invade the body politic and drain it of all 
higher and nobler aims. 

Mein Kampf is a remarkable anticipation of things to come. Hitler’s 
vision and worldview were realized more quickly than even he could have 
thought possible. This is tangible proof of the power of ideas to remake the 
world, when accompanied by a sense of greatness and higher purpose. Such 
things are utterly lacking in the world today, and thus they seem strange, 
odd, and even frightening to us. We forget that, for much of our history, 
they were the very means by which nations and cultures thrived. 

The second point is this: The parallels to the present day are striking. 
Jewish domination of German society in the 1920s mirrors that of the 
United States, England, and Canada today. The tactics of AIPAC, the role 
of the Jewish Lobby, the sad state of media and entertainment industries, 
cowardice in corporate leadership, widespread moral decay, environmental 
degradation, manipulations of global capitalists and stock-market traders— 
all these have their counterparts in pre-Nazi Germany. 

Hitler surely would have been appalled at the world of today. In America, 
he would find Jewish leadership in all major media organizations and film 
studios; Jewish money decisive in all national political races; and an 
American Supreme Court with three Jews, out of nine justices. Germany 
today wilts under the so-called leadership of the Judenknecht Merkel, who 
allows that once-great nation to be flooded with a mass of foreign ethnicities, 
even as she pays monumental Holocaust reparations to the Israeli state. And 
most all European nations readily sign up to fight Israel’s wars in the Middle 
East and around the world. Malaysian leader Mahathir Mohamad was surely 
correct when he said, “Today Jews rule the world by proxy; they get others 
to fight and die for them.” Again, just as Hitler had predicted—the demise 


39 


MEIN KAMPF 


of National Socialism would mean the triumph of a Jewish-inspired 
worldview. 

It seems hopeless. And yet, to a young Adolf Hitler in 1920’s Germany, 
things also seemed hopeless. But he knew that, with a bold vision and true 
force of will, that things could change—and quickly. Thus has it always 
been so. The future is fixed only to those who cannot envision something 
better, something higher, something greater. Even in the worst of times, 
true visionaries have always emerged. It has happened in the past, and it 
will happen again. 

Mein Kampf is one man’s assessment of history and vision for the future. 
It is blunt; it is harsh; it is unapologetic. It does not comply with contemporary 
standards of politeness, objectivity, and political correctness. It sounds 
offensive to sensitive modern ears. But the book is undeniably important. It 
is more consequential than perhaps any other political work in history. It 
deserves to be read, in a clear and unbiased translation. And each reader will 
then be free to determine its ultimate value and meaning for themselves. 


40 


MEIN KAMPF 


ADOLF HITLER 


VOLUME ONE 


CHAPTER 1: 
IN MY PARENTS' HOUSE 


I consider it most fortunate today that destiny selected Braunau-on- 
the-Inn to be my birthplace.' This little town lies on the border between 
two German states—the union of which seems, at least to us of the younger 
generation, a task to which we should dedicate our lives and pursue with 
every possible means! 

German-Austria must return to the great German Motherland. And not 
for mere economic reasons. No, no. Even if the union were a matter of 
economic indifference, and even if it were to be economically 
disadvantageous, it still must take place. The same blood should be in the 
same Reich.” The German people have no right to engage in colonialism 
until they have brought all their sons together in one state. Only when the 
territory of the Reich embraces all Germans and then finds itself unable to 
assure them a livelihood, only then will the moral right arise to acquire 
foreign territory. The plow will then become the sword, and the tears of 
war will produce our daily bread for generations to come. 

And so this little border town appeared to me as the symbol of a great 
mission. But in another way too, it points to a lesson that is applicable 
today. More than 100 years ago, this insignificant place was the scene of a 
tragic calamity that affected the whole German nation. It will be 
remembered forever, at least throughout German history. At the time of our 
Fatherland’s deepest humiliation, Johannes Palm—Nuremberger, 


' Braunau, Austria lies about 25 km north of Salzburg, and about 50 km east of 
Munich. It has a present-day population of some 16,000. The river Inn is the 
border with Germany. 

2 ‘Reich’ may be translated variously as ‘empire,’ ‘kingdom,’ or ‘realm.’ 
Throughout the present text, it will often appear as ‘empire’ but in general will 
be left untranslated. 


43 


MEIN KAMPF 


bookseller, uncompromising nationalist, and enemy of the French—was 
put to death here because he had the misfortune to have loved Germany so 
passionately.? He stubbornly refused to reveal the names of his colleagues, 
or rather the leaders who were chiefly responsible for the affair. The same 
happened with Leo Schlageter.’ The former, like the latter, was denounced 
to the French by a government agent. An Augsburg police chief won this 
unenviable fame on that occasion, and set the example that was later to be 
copied by neo-German officials of Herr Severing’s regime.° 

It was in this little town on the Inn—gilded by the memory of a German 
martyr, a town that was Bavarian by blood but under Austrian rule—that 
my parents lived, towards the end of the last century. My father was a civil 
servant who fulfilled his duties very conscientiously. My mother looked 
after the household and lovingly devoted herself to the care of her children. 

I don’t remember much from that period because, after a few years, 
my father had to leave that beloved border town. He took up a new post 
farther down the Inn, at Passau, hence in Germany itself. 

In those days it was typical for an Austrian civil servant to be 
transferred periodically from one post to another. Soon my father was 
transferred to Linz, and there he retired to live on his pension. But this 
didn’t mean that the old gentleman would now ‘rest.’ As the son of a poor 
cottager, and while still young, he grew restless and left home. When he 
was barely 13 years old, he slipped on his small backpack and set forth 
from his native woodland parish. Despite the pleas of villagers who could 
speak from experience, he went to Vienna to learn a trade. This was in the 
1850s. 

It was a difficult time, that of deciding to leave home and face the 
unknown, with three gulden in his pocket. By the time the boy of 13 
became a youth of 17, he had passed his apprenticeship examination as a 
craftsman, but was not content. Quite the contrary. The long period of 
hardship, constant want, and misery strengthened his resolve to give up 
working at a trade and strive for ‘something higher.’ As a boy it had seemed 
to him that the position of the parish priest in his home village was the 


3 Palm was executed in 1806 by Napoleon’s forces for publishing a pamphlet in 
defense of Germany. 


4 Schlageter actively opposed the French occupation of the Ruhr; he was shot in 
1923. 


5 Carl Severing was German Minister of Interior during the Weimar regime. He 
held office from 1928 to 1930. 


44 


CHAPTER 1 


highest in the scale of attainment; but now that the big city had enlarged 
his outlook, he looked upon the state official as the highest of all. With the 
tenacity of one whom misery and suffering had already made ‘old’ while 
still young, the 17-year-old stuck to his new project. He became a civil 
servant. He was about 23 years old, I think, when he achieved his life’s 
dream. Thus he was able to fulfill the promise he had made as a poor boy, 
to not return to his native village until he was a success. 

He achieved his goal. But back in the village, there was no one who 
remembered him as a little boy, and the village itself had become strange 
to him. 

Finally, when he was 56 years old, he retired. But he couldn’t bear to 
be idle for even a single day. On the outskirts of the small market town of 
Lambach, in Upper Austria, he bought a farm and tilled it himself. Thus, 
at the end of a long and hard-working career, he came back to the life that 
his father had led. 


1.1 THE YOUNG RINGLEADER 


It was at this time that I first began to have ideals of my own. I spent a 
good deal of time playing out in the open, on the long road from school, 
and mixing up with some of the roughest boys, which caused my mother 
many anxious moments. This made me something quite the opposite of a 
stay-at-home. I gave scarcely any serious thought to the question of 
choosing a vocation in life; but I certainly had no interest in the kind of 
career that my father had followed. 

I think that an inborn talent for speaking now began to develop in me, 
during the more or less strenuous arguments with my friends. I became a 
youthful ringleader, one who learned quickly at school but was rather 
difficult to manage. In my free time, I practiced singing in the choir of the 
monastery church at Lambach. I was well-situated to be emotionally 
impressed again and again by the magnificent splendor of the church 
ceremonies. It was natural for me to look upon the Abbot as representing 
the highest human ideal worth striving for, just as the humble village priest 
had appeared to my father in his day. 

For awhile at least, that was this case. But my father didn’t appreciate 
my oratorical gifts as beneficial for a career, and so he naturally couldn’t 
understand my youthful ideas. This internal conflict made him feel 
somewhat concerned. 


45 


MEIN KAMPF 


As it happened, my short-lived yearnings soon gave way to hopes that 
were better suited to my temperament. Browsing through my father’s 
books, I happened to come across some publications that dealt with military 
subjects. One of these was a popular history of the Franco-German War of 
1870-71. It consisted of two volumes of an illustrated periodical dating 
from those years. These became my favorite reading. Soon that great and 
heroic conflict began to dominate my thinking. And from that time on, I 
became more and more enthusiastic about everything that was at all 
connected with war or military affairs. 

But this story had a special significance for me on other grounds, too. 
For the first time, and as yet in only quite a vague way, I began to think: Is 
there a difference—and ifso, what is it—between the Germans who fought 
that war and the other Germans? Why didn’t Austria also take part in it? 
Why didn’t my father and all the others fight in that struggle? 

Are we not the same as other Germans? 

Do we not all belong together? That was the first time that this problem 
began to agitate my brain. And from the conclusions that I reached, I was 
forced to accept the fact—though with a secret envy—that not all Germans 
had the good luck to belong to Bismarck’s Reich. 

This was something that I couldn’t understand. 


1.2 ‘CHOICE’ OF PROFESSION 


It was decided that I should study. 

Considering my whole personality, and especially my temperament, 
my father decided that the classical subjects studied at the Gymnasium were 
not suited to my natural talents. He thought that the Realschule would suit 
me better. My obvious talent for drawing confirmed this for him; in his 
opinion, drawing was a neglected subject in the Austrian Gymnasium. 
Another likely factor was the memory of his own hard road, and this 
contributed to him looking upon classical studies as unpractical; 
accordingly, he set little value on them. At the back of his mind, he believed 
that his son should also become a government official. Indeed, he had 
decided on that career for me. 

Due to the difficulties through which he had to struggle in his own case, 
he overestimated what he had achieved. His success was exclusively the 
result of his own indefatigable effort and energy. The characteristic pride 


46 


CHAPTER1 


of the self-made man led him to the idea that his son should follow the 
same calling—and if possible, to rise even higher. Moreover, this idea was 
strengthened by the consideration that the results of his own life’s work 
put him in a position to aid his son’s advancement in the same career. 

It was simply inconceivable to him that I might reject that which had 
meant everything in life to him. My father’s decision was simple, definite, 
and clear. In his eyes, it was something to be taken for granted. A man of 
such a nature, who had become domineering by reason of his own hard 
struggles, could not think of allowing inexperienced and irresponsible 
young men to choose their own careers. 

To act in such a way, where the future of his own son was concerned, 
would have been a grave and reprehensible weakness in the exercise of 
parental authority and responsibility; it was something utterly incompatible 
with his characteristic sense of duty. 

And yet things had to turn out differently. 


1.3 NEVER A CIVIL SERVANT... 


For the first time in my life—I was then 11 years old—I felt myself 
forced into open opposition. No matter how hard and determined my father 
might be about putting his own plans and opinions into action, I was no 
less obstinate in rejecting an idea that didn’t appeal to me at all. 

I wouldn’t become a civil servant. 

Neither persuasion nor ‘serious’ wamings could break down that 
opposition. I would not, on any account, become a state official. All the 
attempts that my father made to arouse in me a love for that profession, by 
envisioning his own career for me, had only the opposite effect. It nauseated 
me to think that one day I might be chained to an office desk, and that I 
couldn’t control my own time but would be forced to spend the whole of 
my life filling out forms. 

One can imagine what kind of thoughts such a prospect aroused in the 
mind of a young man who was by no means ‘good’ in the usual sense of 
that term! 

The ridiculously easy school tasks that we were given made it possible 
for me to spend far more time outdoors than at home. Today—when my 
political opponents pry into my life with diligent scrutiny, as far back as 
the days of my boyhood, so as to finally be able to prove what dirty tricks 


47 


MEIN KAMPF 


this ‘Hitler’ was used to in his youth—I thank heaven that I can look back 
to those happy days and find the memory helpful. The fields and the woods 
were then the battlefields on which all disputes were decided. 

Even attendance at the Realschule could not alter my way of spending 
my time. 


1.4 ...,BUT RATHER AN ARTIST 


But now I had another battle to fight. 

As long as my father’s plan to make me a state functionary contradicted 
my own inclinations only in theory, the conflict was bearable. I could be 
discreet about expressing my personal views and thus avoid constantly 
recurring arguments. My own resolution not to become a government 
official was sufficient for the time being to put my mind completely at rest. 
I resolutely held on to that conviction. But the situation became more 
difficult once I had a positive plan of my own, one that I presented to my 
father as an alternative. This happened when I was 12 years old. 

How it happened, I cannot exactly say now. But one day it became 
clear to me that I would be a painter—I mean an artist. It was a fact that I 
had an aptitude for drawing. It was even one of the reasons why my father 
had sent me to the Realschule. But he had never thought of having that 
talent developed in such a way that I could become a professional painter. 
Quite the contrary. When, as a result of my renewed refusal to adopt his 
preferred plan, my father asked me for the first time what I myself really 
wished to be, my resolve expressed itself almost automatically. For a 
moment my father was speechless. 

“A painter? An artist?” 

He wondered whether I was sane. He thought that he might not have 
heard me right, or misunderstood me. But when I explained my ideas to 
him, and he saw how seriously I took them, he opposed it with all the 
determination of his nature. His decision was very fundamental; any 
consideration of my own natural abilities was out of the question. 

“An artist, no, not as long as I live, never.” But seeing as I had inherited 
much of my father’s obstinacy—besides having other qualities of my 
own—iy reply was equally forceful. Except that it stated something quite 
the contrary. 

At that point, our struggle became a stalemate. Father would not 
abandon his ‘Never,’ and I became all the more firm in my ‘Nevertheless.’ 


48 


CHAPTER1 


Naturally, the consequences were unpleasant. The old gentleman was 
bitterly annoyed; and indeed so was I, although I really loved him. My 
father forbade me to entertain any hopes of taking up the art of painting as 
a profession. I went a step further and declared that I would not study 
anything else. With such declarations, the situation became ever more 
strained, so that the old man irrevocably decided to assert his parental 
authority at all costs. That led me to adopt an attitude of circumspect 
silence, but I put my threat into action. I thought that once it became clear 
to my father that I was making no progress at the Realschule, he would be 
forced to allow me to follow my dream—for better or worse. 


1.5 THE YOUNG NATIONALIST 


I don’t know whether I calculated rightly or not. My failure to make 
progress in school was obvious. I studied just the subjects that appealed to 
me, especially those that I thought I might need later as a painter. What 
didn’t appear to have any importance, or what didn’t otherwise appeal to 
me, I completely sabotaged. My school reports of that time were always in 
the extremes of good or bad, according to the subject. In one column my 
evaluation read ‘very good’ or ‘excellent.’ In another it read ‘average’ or 
even ‘below average.’ By far my best subjects were geography and, even 
more so, general history. These were my two favorite subjects, and I led 
the class in them. 

When I look back over so many years and try to judge the results of 
that experience, I findtwo very significant facts standing out clearly: 

First, I became a nationalist. 

Second, I learned to understand and grasp the true meaning of history. 


1.6 THE GERMAN OSTMARK 


The old Austria was a multi-national state. 

In those days, at least the citizens of the German Reich, taken through 
and through, couldn’t understand what that fact meant in the everyday life 
of the people within such a state. After the magnificent triumphant march 
of the victorious armies in the Franco-German War, the Germans in the 
Reich became steadily more and more estranged from the Germans beyond 
their frontiers—partly because they didn’t wish to appreciate the true value 


49 


MEIN KAMPF 


of those other Germans, and partly because they were incapable of doing 
so. The degenerate dynasty was often confused with the people, who were 
at root healthy. 


The Germans of the Reich didn’t realize that if the Austrian Germans 
had not been of the best blood, they could never have given their 
characteristic stamp to an empire of 52 million—such that the erroneous 
idea arose that Austria was a German state. This error led to dire 
consequences. But all the same, it was a magnificent testimony to the 
character of the 10 million Germans in the Ostmark.° Only very few of the 
Germans in the Reich itself had an idea of the bitter struggle that those 
Eastern Germans had to carry on daily for the preservation of their German 
language, schools, and character. 

Only today—when a tragic fate has torn several millions of our 
kinsfolk away from the Reich and forced them to live under foreign rule, 
dreaming of that common fatherland towards which all their yearnings are 
directed, and struggling to maintain the right to use their mother tongue— 
only now have the wider circles come to realize what it means to fight for 
one’s people. Today perhaps there are some who can assess the greatness 
of that German spirit that animated the Reich’s old Ostmark. It enabled 
those people, left entirely on their own, to defend the Reich against the East 
for several centuries. They also were able to secure the boundaries of the 
German language through a guerilla war of attrition, at a time when the 
Reich was more interested in colonies than in protecting its own flesh and 
blood at its very doorstep. 


1.7 THE STRUGGLE FOR GERMANISM 


In this battle over the language of old Austria, there were, as in every 
such struggle, three groups: the fighters, the slackers, and the traitors. 

The sifting process began at school. And it is worth noting that the 
language-war was waged in perhaps its bitterest form in school; this was 
the nursery where the seeds had to be watered that were to spring up and 
form the coming generation. The tactical objective of the fight was to win 
over the child, and it was to the child that the first rallying cry was addressed: 


6 ‘Ostmark’ was the German nationalist designation for German-Austria, that is, 
the German part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. 


50 


CHAPTER1 


“German boy, don’t forget that you are a German,” and “Remember, 
little girl, that one day you must become a German mother!” 

Those who know something of the youthful spirit can understand how 
the young will always lend a glad ear to such a rallying cry. The young 
people led the struggle through many forms, fighting in their own way and 
with their own weapons. 

They refused to sing non-German songs. The greater the efforts made 
to win them away from their German allegiance, the more they exalted the 
glory of their German heroes. They went hungry so that they might spare 
their pennies to help the war chest of their elders. They were incredibly 
aware of the significance of what the non-German teachers said, and they 
contradicted them in unison. They wore the forbidden emblems of their 
own kinsfolk and were happily penalized or even beaten for doing so. On 
a small scale, they were mirrors of loyalty from which the elders might 
learn a lesson. 

And thus it was that, at a comparatively early age, I took part in the 
nationalist struggles of old Austria. When meetings were held for the 
Stidmark and the School League, we wore cornflowers and black-red-gold 
colors to express our loyalty. We greeted each other with “Heil,” and 
instead of the Austrian anthem we sang Deutschland tiber Alles, despite 
warnings and penalties. Thus the youth were politically educated at a time 
when the citizens of the so-called national state knew little of their own 
nationality except the language. 

I, of course, didn’t belong to the slackers. Within a short time I had 
become an ardent ‘German Nationalist,’ which had a different meaning 

from our present party concept. 

I rapidly moved in the nationalist direction. By the time I was 15 years 
old, I had come to understand the distinction between dynastic ‘patriotism’ 
and ‘nationalism’ based on the concept of Volk, or people—my inclination 
being entirely in favor of the latter. 


1.8 LESSONS FROM HISTORY 
Such a preference may not perhaps be clearly intelligible to those who 
have never taken the trouble to study the internal conditions that prevailed 


under the Habsburg Monarchy.’ Among historical studies, universal history 


7 The Habsburg Monarchy refers to the family dynasty that ruled in central Europe 


51 


MEIN KAMPF 


was the subject almost exclusively taught in the Austrian schools; there 
was very little of specific Austrian history. The fate of this state was closely 
bound up with the existence and development of Germany as a whole— 
such that a division of history into German history and Austrian history 
would be practically inconceivable. And indeed it was only when the 
German people came to be divided into two states that this division of 
German history began to take place. 

The insignia of former imperial glory, which are still preserved in Vienna, appear 
to cast a magic spell. They guarantee an eternal bond between these two peoples. 

When the Habsburg State crumbled to pieces,’ the Austrian Germans 
instinctively raised an outcry for union with their German fatherland. That — 
was the voice of a unanimous yearning in the hearts of the whole people 
for a return to the never-forgotten home of their fathers. But such a general 
yeaming could not be explained except by attributing its cause to the 
historical training through which the individual Austrian Germans had 
passed. Therein lay a spring that never dried up. Especially in times of 
distraction and forgetfulness, its quiet voice was a reminder of the past— 
bidding the people to look out beyond mere momentary prosperity to a new 
future. 

The teaching of universal history in the so-called high schools is still 
very unsatisfactory. Few teachers realize that the purpose of teaching 
history is not the memorizing of certain dates and facts that the student is 
not interested in knowing: the exact date of a battle, or the birthday of some 
marshal or other. And the student isn’t at all—or only incidentally— 
interested in knowing when the crown of his fathers was placed on the brow 
of some monarch. These are certainly not looked upon as important matters. 

To study history means to search for and discover the forces that are 
the causes of those results that appear to us as historical events. 

The art of reading and studying consists in this: Remember the 
essentials and forget what is inessential. 

Probably my whole future life was determined by the fact that Ihad a 
history professor who understood, as few others understand, how to make 
this viewpoint prevail in the classroom. This teacher was Dr. Leopold 


for 400 years. It began in 1519 with Charles V, and ended in 1918 with Charles I. 
The Habsburgs were the ruling power in the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The 
Monarchy was, of course, finished by the time Hitler wrote these words in 1923. 


8 In 1918. 
52 


CHAPTER1 


Pétsch, of the Realschule at Linz.° He was the ideal personification of the 
qualities necessary for a teacher of history in the sense I mentioned above. 
An elderly gentleman with a decisive manner but a kindly heart, he was a 
very compelling speaker and was able to inspire us with his own enthusiasm. 

Even today I cannot recall without emotion that venerable personality 
whose enthusiastic exposition of history so often made us entirely forget 
the present. He allowed us to be transported into the ‘past, as if by magic. 
He penetrated through the dim mist of thousands of years and transformed 
the historical memory of the dead past into a living reality. When we 
listened to him, we became afire with enthusiasm; sometimes we were even 
moved to tears. 

It was still more fortunate that this professor was able not only to 
illustrate the past by examples from the present, but from the past he was 
also able to draw a lesson for the present. He understood better than anyone 
else the everyday problems that were then stirring in our minds. He used 
the national fervor that we felt in our own small way as an instrument of 
our education, in that he often appealed to our national sense of honor. In 
that way he maintained order and held our attention much more easily than 
he could have done by any other means. 

It was because of him that history became my favorite subject. 

As a natural consequence, but without my teacher’s deliberate 
intention, I then and there became a young revolutionary. 

After all, who could have studied German history under such a teacher 
and not become an enemy of that state whose rulers exercised such a 
disastrous influence on the destinies of the German nation? 

And how could one remain a faithful subject of the House of Habsburg, 
whose past history and present conduct proved it to be always ready to 
betray the interests of the German people, for the sake of trivial personal 
interests? 

Did we not realize, even as youngsters, that this Austrian State did not, 
and could not, have any love for us Germans? 

That which history taught us about the policy of the House of Habsburg 
was confirmed by our experiences. In north and south, the poison of foreign 
races was eating into the body of our people. Even Vienna was steadily 
becoming more and more a non-German city. The ‘Imperial House’ favored 
the Czechs on every possible occasion. Indeed, it was divine retribution 
that caused Germanism’s most deadly enemy in Austria, the Archduke 


° Pétsch (1853-1942) taught Hitler from ages 12 through 15. 
53 


MEIN KAMPF 


Franz Ferdinand, to fall by the very bullets that he himself had helped to 
cast. Working from above, he was the chief patron of the movement to 
make Austria a Slav state. 

The burdens laid on the shoulders of the German people were monstrous, 
and the sacrifices of blood and treasure that they had to make were incredibly 
heavy. Yet anyone who was not blind must have seen that it was all in vain. 
What affected us most bitterly was the awareness of the fact that this whole 
system was morally shielded by the alliance with Germany, whereby the slow 
rooting-out of Germanism from the old Austrian Monarchy seemed in some 
way to be more or less sanctioned by Germany herself. Habsburg hypocrisy, 
which outwardly tried to make the people believe that Austria was still a 
German state, increased the feeling of hatred against the Imperial House. At 
the same time, it aroused a spirit of rebellion and contempt. 

But in the German Reich itself, its rulers understood nothing of what 
all this meant. As if struck blind, they stood beside a corpse; in the very 
symptoms of decomposition, they believed that they saw signs of a renewed 
vitality. 

In that unhappy alliance between the young German Reich and the 
illusory Austrian State lay the germ of the [First] World War, and also of 
the final collapse. 

In the course of this book, I will go to the root of the problem. Suffice 
it to say here that in the very early years of my youth, I came to certain 
conclusions that I have never abandoned. Indeed, I became more 
profoundly convinced of them as the years passed. They were: 

That the dissolution of Austria is a preliminary condition for the 
defense of Germany; further, that national feeling is by no means identical 
with dynastic patriotism; finally, and above all, that the House of Habsburg 
was destined to bring misfortune to the German nation. 

As a logical consequence of these convictions, there arose in me a 
feeling of intense love for my German-Austrian home, and a profound 
hatred of the Austrian State. 

The kind of historical thinking that I developed through my study of 
history at school never left me afterwards. World history became more and 
more an inexhaustible source for the understanding of contemporary 
historical events—in other words, politics. Therefore I will not ‘learn’ 
politics, but rather let politics teach me. 

A precocious ‘revolutionary’ in politics, I was no less a precocious 
revolutionary in art. 


54 


CHAPTER1 


1.9 DEVOTION TO WAGNER 


At that time, the provincial capital of Upper Austria had a theater that 
was, relatively speaking, not bad. Almost everything played there. When I 
was 12 years old, I saw William Tell performed. That was my first theater 
experience. Some months later I saw Lohengrin, the first opera I had ever 
heard. I was fascinated at once. My youthful enthusiasm for the Bayreuth 
Master [Wagner] knew no bounds. Again and again I was drawn to hear 
his operas; and today I consider it a great stroke of luck that these modest 
productions in the little provincial city made it possible for me to appreciate 
it more intensely later on. 

But all this helped to reinforce my profound distaste for the career that 
my father had chosen for me. This dislike became especially strong after I 
outgrew my adolescence—a process that was, in my case, especially 
painful. I became more and more convinced that I’d never be happy as a 
state official. And now that the Realschule had acknowledged my aptitude 
for drawing, my own resolution became all the stronger. 

Thereafter, neither pleas nor threats could change things. 

I wanted to become a painter, and no power in the world could force 
me to become a civil servant. 

Oddly though, as I grew older, I became more and more interested in 
architecture. 

At the time, I considered this a natural development of my talent for 
painting, and I inwardly rejoiced at this expansion of my artistic interests. 

I didn’t suspect that things would tum out differently. 


1.10 THE DEATH OF MY PARENTS 


The question of my career was decided much sooner than I could have 
expected. 

When I was 13, Isuddenly lost my father. He was still in robust health 
when a stroke of apoplexy painlessly ended his earthly wanderings, and 
left us all deeply bereaved. His deepest wish was to be able to help his son 
advance in a career and thus to save me from the harsh ordeal that he 
himself had experienced. It appeared to him that he had failed. And yet, 
though he himself was not conscious of it, he had sown the seeds of a future 
that neither of us foresaw at that time. 

At first, nothing changed outwardly. 


55 


MEIN KAMPF 


My mother felt it her duty to continue my education in accordance with 
my father’s wishes. This meant that she would have me study for the civil 
service. For my own part, I was more determined than ever to not undertake 
this career. The school curriculum and teaching methods were so far 
removed from my ideals that I became profoundly indifferent. 

Illness suddenly came to my assistance. Within a few weeks, it decided 
my future, putting an end to the long-standing family conflict. My lungs 
became so seriously affected that the doctor strongly advised my mother 
not to allow me to take up a career that would require working in an office. 
He ordered me to stop attending the Realschule for at least a year. What I 
had secretly desired for such a long time, and had persistently fought for, 
now became a reality almost at one stroke. 

Concerned about my illness, my mother agreed that I would leave the 
Realschule and attend the Academy. 

Those were happy days, and they seemed to me almost as a dream; but 
they were bound to remain only a dream. Two years later, my mother’s 
death put a brutal end to all my wonderful plans. 

She succumbed to a long and painful illness, one that, from the very 
beginning, permitted little hope of recovery. Though expected, her death 
came as a terrible blow to me. I respected my father, but I loved my mother. 

Poverty and hard reality forced me to decide quickly. The meager 
family resources had been almost entirely used up by my mother’s severe 
illness. The allowance which came to me as an orphan was not enough for 
the bare necessities of life. Somehow or other, I would have to earn my 
own bread. 

With my clothes and linen in hand, and with an indomitable resolution 
in my heart, I left for Vienna. I hoped to forestall fate, as my father had 
done 50 years before. I was determined to become ‘something’—but 
certainly not a civil servant. 


56 


CHAPTER 2: 
YEARS OF STUDY AND 
SUFFERING IN VIENNA 


When my mother died, my fate had already been decided, at least in 
one respect. 

During the last months of her illness, I went to Vienna to take the 
entrance examination for the Academy of Fine Arts. Armed with a pile of 
drawings, I was sure that I would pass the examination quite easily. At the 
Realschule, 1 was by far the best student in the drawing class, and since 
that time I made exceptional progress in the practice of drawing. I was 
therefore quite pleased with myself, and was proud and happy at the 
prospect of what I considered to be a sure success. 

But there was one misgiving. It seemed to me that I was better qualified 
for drawing than for painting, especially in the various branches of 
architectural drawing. At the same time, my interest in architecture was 
constantly growing. And I advanced more quickly in this direction after 
my first visit to Vienna, which lasted two weeks; I was not yet 16 years 
old. 

I went to the Court Museum to study the paintings in the art gallery 
there; but the building itself captured almost all my interest, and from early 
morning until late at night I spent all my time visiting the various public 
buildings. And it was always the buildings themselves that were the main 
attraction for me. I stood for hours in wonderment at the Opera and the 
Parliament. The whole Ring Strasse had a magic effect upon me, as if it 
were a scene from the Thousand-and-one-Nights. 


57 


MEIN KAMPF 


2.1 SKILL AS AN ARCHITECT 


And now here I was, for the second time in this beautiful city, 
impatiently waiting to hear the result of the entrance exam but confident 
of success. I was so convinced that, when the news came that I had failed, 
it struck me like a bolt from the blue. Yet that’s what happened. I went to 
see the Rector and asked him why they refused to accept me as a student 
in the general School of Painting, which was part of the Academy. He said 
that my sketches unquestionably showed that painting was not what I was 
suited for, but rather that they gave clear indications of my aptitude for 
architectural design. Therefore the place for me was the School of 
Architecture, which also formed part of the Academy. At first it was 
impossible to understand this, seeing that I had never been to an 
architectural school and had never received any instruction in architectural 
design. 

I was quite dejected when I left Hansen Palace, on Schillerplatz. I felt 
at odds with myself for the first time in my young life. Those words came 
like a lightning flash, one that revealed a longstanding conflict within 
myself. But until this point, I couldn’t give a clear account of it. 

Within a few days, I myself also realized that I would become an 
architect. 

But of course, the path was very difficult. I now bitterly regretted my 
former conduct in neglecting and despising certain subjects at the 
Realschule. Before taking up courses at the School of Architecture, it was 
necessary to attend the Technical Building School. But this in turn required 
a graduation certificate from high school. And I simply didn’t have this. 
The fulfillment of my artistic dream seemed impossible. 

After my mother’s death, I came to Vienna for the third time. This visit 
was destined to last several years. Having been there before, I quickly 
recovered my old calm and determination. My former self-assurance came 
back, and I fixed my eyes steadily on the goal. I would be an architect. 
Obstacles are placed in our path in life, not to defeat us but to be 
surmounted. And I was fully determined to surmount these obstacles, 
constantly holding the picture of my father in my mind—he who raised 
himself up by his own efforts to the position of a civil servant, even though 
he was the poor son of a village shoemaker. I had a better start, and my 
odds of success were better. At that time, my lot in life seemed to me a 
harsh one; but today I see in it the wise workings of Providence. The 
Goddess of Fate took me in her arms and often threatened to smash me; 


58 


CHAPTER 2 


but my will grew stronger as the obstacles increased, and in the end, my 
will was triumphant. 

I’m thankful for that period of my life because it hardened me and 
enabled me to be as tough as I am now. And even more so, because I 
appreciate the fact that I was thereby saved from an empty life of ease, and 
that a mother’s darling was taken from her tender arms and handed over to 
Adversity as a new mother. Though I fought against it as too hard a fate, 
I’m grateful that I was thrust into a world of misery and poverty, and thus 
came to know the people for whom I was later to fight. 


2.2 FORMATION OF A WORLDVIEW 


It was during this time that my eyes were opened to two dangers, the 
names of which I had scarcely known before. I had no idea whatsoever of 
their terrible significance for the existence of the German people. These 
two dangers were Marxism and Jewry. 

For many people, the name of Vienna signifies innocent pleasure, a 
festive place for happy people. For me, unfortunately, it’s a living memory 
of the saddest period in my life. 

Even today, the mention of that city arouses in me only gloomy 
thoughts. Five years of poverty in that Phaecian town.' Five years in which 
I had to earn my daily bread—first as a casual laborer and then as a painter 
of little trifles. And a meager morsel it was indeed, insufficient to calm my 
constant hunger. That hunger was my faithful guardian, one that never left 
me and took part in everything I did. Every book that I bought meant 
renewed hunger, and every visit to the opera meant the intrusion of that 
inhospitable companion in the days to follow. I was always struggling with 
my unsympathetic friend. Even so, it was during that time that I learned 
more than ever before. Apart from my architectural studies and rare visits 
to the opera—for which I had to go hungry—I had no other pleasure in life 
except my books. 

I read a great deal then, and I thought deeply about what I read. All 
my free time after work was devoted exclusively to study. Thus within a 
few years, I was able to acquire a stock of knowledge that I find useful 
even to this day. 

1 A reference to Homer’s Odyssey (Book VI). Phaeacia, or Scheria, was an 


island of legendary happiness, where residents preferred the pursuit of pleasure 
to hard work. 


59 


MEIN KAMPF 


But even more than that: 

During those years, a view of life and a definite worldview took shape 
in my mind. These became the granite foundation of my conduct at that 
time. Since then, I have extended that foundation only very little, and I 
have changed nothing in it. 

On the contrary. 

I am firmly convinced today that, generally speaking, it is in youth that 
men lay the essential groundwork of their creative thought, wherever that 
creative thought exists. I distinguish between the wisdom of age—which 
can only arise from the greater profundity and foresight that are based on 
the experiences of a long life—and the creative genius of youth. The latter 
blossoms out in thought and ideas with inexhaustible fertility, without being 
immediately useful, because of their very exuberance. These ideas fumish 
the building materials and plans for the future. And it is from them that age 
takes the stones and constructs the building—unless the so-called wisdom 
of age smothers the creative genius of youth. 


2.3 REMOVAL.OF PETTY-BOURGEOIS BLINDERS 


The life that I previously led at home with my parents differed little 
from that of everyone else. I looked forward to the next day without worry, 
and there was no such thing as a social problem to be faced. 

Those with whom I passed my younger days belonged to the small 
bourgeois class. It was therefore a world that had very little contact with 
the world of genuine manual laborers. For, though at first this may appear 
surprising, the gulf that separates that class—which is by no means 
economically well-off—from the manual laboring class is often deeper than 
people think. The reason for this division, which we may almost call 
enmity, lies in the fear that dominates a social group that has risen only 
slightly above the level of the manual laborer—a fear that it may fall back 
into its old condition, or at least be again classed with the laborers. 
Moreover, there is something repulsive in remembering the cultural 
indigence of that lower class and their rough manners with one another. 
Those who are only on the first rung of the social ladder find it unbearable 
to be forced into contact with the cultural level and standard of living from 
which they have risen. 

Consequently, the higher classes feel less constraint in their dealings 
with the lowest class of men than would be possible for the ‘up-starts.’ 


60 


CHAPTER 2 


For by the word ‘up-start’ I mean everyone who has raised himself 
through his own efforts to a social level higher than that to which he 
formerly belonged. 

Ultimately this struggle, which is often hard, destroys all sympathy. 
Our own fight for existence kills our feeling for the misery of those who 
have been left behind. 

From this point of view, fate was kind to me. Circumstances forced me 
to return to that world of poverty and economic insecurity that my father 
had raised himself from in his early days. The blinders of a narrow petty- 
bourgeois education were torn from my eyes. Now for the first time, I 
learned to know men; and I learned to distinguish between empty 
appearances or brutal manners and the real inner nature of the person. 


2.4 VIENNA’S SOCIAL CONFLICTS 


At the beginning of the century, Vienna was, socially speaking, one of 
the most backward cities in Europe. 

Dazzling riches and loathsome poverty were intermingled in violent 
contrast. In the center and inner city, one felt the pulse of an empire of 52 
million, one with all the perilous charm of a state of multiple nationalities. 
The dazzling splendor of the Court acted like a magnet on the wealth and 
intelligence of the whole empire. And this attraction was further 
strengthened by the centralizing power of the Habsburg Monarchy. 

This centralizing policy was necessary in order to hold together that 
hodge-podge of mixed nationalities. But as a result, there was an 
extraordinary concentration of high officials in the city, which served as 
both a metropolis and the imperial residence. 

But Vienna was not merely the political and intellectual center of the 
Danube Monarchy; it was also the commercial center. Besides the large 
group of ranking military officers, state officials, artists, and scientists, 
there was the still larger mass of workers. Abject poverty confronted the 
wealth of the aristocracy and the merchant class, face to face. Thousands 
of unemployed loitered in front of the palaces on the Ring Strasse; and 
beneath this Via Triumphalis of old Austria, the homeless huddled together 
in the murk and filth of the canals. 

There was hardly any other German city in which the social question 
could be studied better than in Vienna. But here I must warn against the 
illusion that this problem can be ‘studied’ from the top down. The man who 


61 


MEIN KAMPF 


has never been in the clutches of that crushing viper can never know what 
its poison is. An attempt to study it in any other way will result only in 
superficial talk and sentimental delusions. Both are harmful—the first 
because it can never go to the root of the question, the second because it 
completely evades the question. 

I don’t know which is worse: to ignore social distress, as do the 
majority of those who have been favored by fortune and those who have 
risen in the social scale through their own routine labor, or the equally 
arrogant and often tactlessness displayed by people who make a fad of 
being charitable and who claim to ‘feel for the people.’ In any case, such 
people sin more than they can imagine. Consequently, and to their own 
astonishment, they find that the ‘social conscience’ on which they pride 
themselves never produces any results; rather, it often causes resentment. 
And then they talk of the ingratitude of the people. 

Such people are slow to learn that there is no place for merely social 
activities, and that there can be no expectation of gratitude. Here there’s no 
question of distributing favors; it’s essentially a matter of restoring justice. 

I was protected against the temptation to study the social question this 
way, for the simple reason that I was forced to live in poverty. Therefore it 
was not a question of studying the problem objectively, but rather one of 
testing its effects on me. Though the guinea pig survived the experiment, 
this is not evidence that it was harmless. 

When I try today to recall the succession of impressions I received at 
that time, I find that I can only do so approximately. Here I will describe 
only the more essential impressions and those that personally affected me 
the most. And I will mention the few lessons that I learned from this 
experience. 


2.5 THE LABORER 


At that time, it was generally not very difficult to find a job because I 
sought work not as a skilled tradesman but as a so-called laborer—ready 
to take any job that tumed up by chance, just for the sake of earning my 
daily bread. 

Thus I found myself in the same situation as all those emigrants who 
shake the dust of Europe from their feet, and with iron determination lay 
the foundations of a new existence in the New World, and earn for 
themselves a new home. Liberated from all the paralyzing prejudices of 


62 


CHAPTER 2 


class and position, environment and tradition, they take any service that 
opens its doors to them—accepting any work that comes their way, and 
filled more and more with the idea that honest work never disgraced 
anyone, no matter what it may be. And so I was resolved to leap into this 
new world with both feet, fighting my way ahead. 

I soon found out that some kind of work was always available. But I 
also learned that it could just as quickly and easily be lost. 

The uncertainty of eaming my daily livelihood soon became the darkest 
feature of this new life. 

The skilled worker was not so frequently thrown into the streets as the 
unskilled worker; yet the former was by no means protected against the 
same fate. Though he may not have to face unemployment due to a lack of 
demand, the lock-out and the strike had the same effect. 

Here the element of insecurity in earning one’s daily bread was the 
bitterest aspect of the whole social-economic system itself. 

The country boy who migrates to the big city is attracted by what has 
been described as easy work—which it may actually be—and fewer working 
hours. He is especially dazzled by the glimmer of the big cities. Accustomed 
to earning a steady wage, he has been taught not to quit his former job until 
anew one is at least in sight. As there is a great scarcity of agricultural labor, 
the chance of long unemployment in the country is very small. 

It’s a mistake to presume that the boy who leaves the countryside for 
the city is less solid than those who stay at home to work on the land. On 
the contrary, experience shows that those who are healthier and more 
vigorous emigrate, and not the reverse. Among these people, I include not 
merely those who emigrate to America, but also the young rural farmhand 
who leaves his native village and migrates to the big city, where he will be 
a stranger. He is ready to take the risk of an uncertain fate. Typically he 
comes to town with little money in his pocket. For the first few days, he is 
not discouraged if he’s not lucky enough to find work. But if he finds a job 
and then soon loses it, the situation is much worse. To find new work, 
especially in winter, is often difficult and indeed sometimes impossible. 


2.6 FATE OF THE WORKER 


For the first few weeks, life is still bearable. He receives his 
unemployment money from his trade union and thus is able to carry on. 
But when the last of his own money is gone and his union stops paying due 


63 


MEIN KAMPF 


to prolonged unemployment, then comes the real distress. He now walks 
the streets, hungry. Often he pawns or sells the last of his belongings. His 
clothes become shabby. And with the increasing poverty of his outward 
appearance, he descends to a lower social level—mixing with a class of 
people that poison his mind, in addition to his physical suffering. He then 
has nowhere to sleep, and if that happens in winter—which is very often 
the case—he is in dire straits. Finally he gets work. But the old story repeats 
itself. For a second time, the same thing happens. Then a third time—by 
now, probably much worse. Little by little, he becomes indifferent to this 
permanent insecurity. Finally he gets used to the repetition. 

Thus even a man who is normally hard-working grows careless in his 
whole attitude towards life. Gradually he becomes a tool in the hands of 
unscrupulous people, who exploit him for the sake of their own advantage. 
He has been so frequently unemployed, through no fault of his own, that 
he now doesn’t care if the strike in which he joins is for securing his 
economic rights, or aimed at the destruction of the State, the social order, 
or even culture in general. He dislikes going on strike, yet he joins it 
anyway, out of sheer indifference. 

I saw this process occur before my eyes thousands of times. And the 
longer I observed it, the more I came to hate that mammoth city that 
greedily attracts men to its heart, in order to mercilessly crush them in the 
end. 

When they arrived, they still belonged to their own people; if they 
stayed, that tie was broken. 

I, too, was so thrown about by life in the metropolis that I experienced 
the workings of this fate myself, and felt its effects on my own soul. One 
thing stood out clearly before my eyes: It was the sudden changes from 
work to idleness, and vice versa, that mattered. The constant fluctuations 
in earnings and spending finally destroyed the sense of thrift for many 
people, and also the habit of controlling spending in an intelligent way. 
One’s body gradually adapts to eating well in good times and going hungry 
in bad. 

Indeed, hunger destroys one’s sense of normal spending in good times, 
when one is again employed. The reason for this is that the suffering that 
the unemployed worker has to endure must be psychologically 
compensated for by a persistent mental mirage in which he imagines 
himself eating well once again. And this dream turns into such an obsession 
that it becomes a morbid impulse to toss off all self-restraint when work 
and wages come again. Therefore, the moment new work is found, he loses 


64 


CHAPTER 2 


control and begins spending like there’s no tomorrow. This upsets even the 
small weekly budget, because spending becomes irrational. When such a 
thing first happens, earnings will last for perhaps five days instead of seven. 
Later on, they last for only three days. If the habit persists, earnings will 
last for scarcely a day. And finally they will disappear in a night. 

Often there are wife and children at home. And in many cases, it 
happens that they, too, are affected by such a way of life—especially if the 
husband is good to them and wants to do the best he can for them, and loves 
them in his own way. Then the week’s earnings are spent within two or 
three days. The family eats and drinks together as long as the money lasts, 
but at the end of the week they go hungry. Then the wife wanders around 
the neighborhood, borrows a little, and runs up small debts with the 
shopkeepers in an effort to reach the end of the week. Their midday meal 
is meager, and often nonexistent. They wait for the coming payday, talking 
and making plans; and while they are hungry, they dream of the happiness 
to come. 

And so the little children become acquainted with misery early in their 
lives. 

But the evil culminates when the husband goes his own way from the 
beginning and the wife protests, simply out of love for the children. Then 
there are quarrels and bad feelings. The husband starts to drink, and 
becomes estranged from his wife. He now gets drunk every Saturday. 
Fighting for her own existence and that of the children, the wife nags him, 
from factory to tavern, in order to get a few pennies from him on payday. 
Then when he finally comes home—maybe on Sunday or even Monday, 
having spent his last cent—pathetic scenes follow, ones that cry out for 
God’s mercy. 

I have actually experienced this hundreds of times. At first I was 
disgusted and indignant. Later, I came to recognize the whole tragedy of 
their misfortune, and to understand the profound causes of it. They were 
the unhappy victims of bad conditions. 

Housing conditions were very bad at that time. Viennese manual 
laborers lived in appalling misery. Even today, I shudder to think of the 
miserable dens in which people lived, the night shelters and the slums, and 
all the sordid scenes of garbage, repulsive filth, and worse. 

Just imagine what will happen one day, when masses of freed slaves 
come forth from these dens of misery, swooping down on their 
unsuspecting fellow men! 

For this other world is indeed unsuspecting. 


65 


MEIN KAMPF 


They have mindlessly allowed these things to go on, without caring 
and even without suspecting that, sooner or later, destiny will take its 
vengeance—unless it is appeased in time. 

Today I earnestly thank Providence for having sent me to such a school. 
There, I couldn’t refuse to take an interest in matters that did not please 
me. This school soon taught me a profound lesson. 

In order not to despair completely of the people with whom I lived, I 
had to separate the outward appearances of their lives from the reasons why 
they developed that way. Then I could bear everything without 
discouragement. Those who emerged from all this misfortune and misery, 
from this filth and outward degradation, were not human beings as such, 
but rather the deplorable results of deplorable laws. In my own life, similar 
hardships prevented me from giving way to a pitying sentimentality at the 
sight of these degraded products of this process of development. 

No, this is not the way to understand these things. 


2.7 THE PATH TO IMPROVEMENT 


Even in those days, I already saw that there was a two-fold method by 
alone which conditions could be improved: 

First: Create better fundamental conditions of social development by 
establishing a profound feeling for social responsibilities. Second: Combine 
this feeling with a ruthless determination to prune away all incurable tumors. 

Just as Nature focuses her greatest attention not on the maintenance of 
what already exists, but on the selective breeding of offspring, so it is in 
human life. Life is less a matter of artificially improving the existing 
generation—which, owing to human characteristics, is impossible 99 
percent of the time—and more a matter of securing from the very start a 
better road for future development. 

During my struggle for existence in Vienna, I clearly perceived that 
the aim of all social activity must never be merely charitable relief, which 
is ridiculous and useless. Rather, it must be a means of finding a way to 
eliminate the fundamental deficiencies in our economic and cultural life— 
deficiencies that necessarily bring about the degradation of the individual, 
or at least lead him towards such degradation. 

The difficulty of employing every means, even the most drastic, against 
those who endanger the state is largely due to an attitude of uncertainty in 
deciding upon the inner motives and causes of this contemporary phenomenon. 


66 


CHAPTER 2 


This uncertainty is grounded exclusively in the sense of guilt that each 
individual feels for having permitted this tragedy of degradation. That 
feeling paralyzes every effort at making a firm decision to act. Because 
they vacillate, these people are timid and half-hearted in putting into effect 
even the measures that are indispensable for self-preservation. 

When the individual is no longer burdened by his own sense of guilt, 
then and only then will he have that inner strength and outer force to 
ruthlessly cut out the parasite growth, and to root out the weeds. 

But because the Austrian State had almost no sense of social-rights or 
social legislation, its inability to combat these evil tumors was obvious. 


2.8 LACK OF ‘NATIONAL PRIDE’ 


I don’t know what appalled me more at that time: the economic misery 
of those who were then my companions, their crude customs and morals, 
or the low level of their intellectual development. 

Our bourgeoisie often rise up in moral indignation upon hearing from 
the mouth of some pitiable tramp that it is all the same to him whether he 
be a German or not, and that he will find himself at home wherever he can 
get enough to keep himself together. 

They protest sternly against such a lack of ‘national pride,’ and strongly 
express their horror at such sentiments. 

But how many people really ask themselves, why it is that their own 
sentiments are better? 

How many of them understand that their natural pride in being 
members of a favored nation arises from the many occasions they have 
encountered that remind them of the greatness of the Fatherland, and of the 
nation in all spheres of artistic and cultural life? 

How many of them realize that pride in the Fatherland is largely 
dependent on knowledge of its greatness in all those spheres? 

Do our bourgeois circles ever think what a ridiculously meager share 
‘the people’ have in that knowledge that is a necessary prerequisite for the 
feeling of pride in one’s fatherland? 

It cannot be objected here that in other countries similar conditions exist, 
and that nevertheless the working classes in those countries have remained 
patriotic. Even if that were so, it would be no excuse for our negligent 
attitude. But it is not so. What we call ‘chauvinistic’ education—in the case 
of the French people, for example—is only the extreme emphasis on the 


67 


MEIN KAMPF 


greatness of France in all spheres of culture or, as the French say, 
civilization. The French boy is not educated on purely objective principles. 
Wherever the importance of the political and cultural greatness of his 
country is concerned, he is taught in the most subjective way that one can 
imagine. 

This education must always be confined to general ideas in a large 
perspective. These ought to be deeply engraved, by constant repetition if 
necessary, on the memories and feelings of the people. 

In our case, however, we are not merely guilty of negative sins of 
omission but also of positively perverting the small bit of knowledge that 
some were fortunate to learn at school. The rats that poison our body-politic 
devour from the hearts and memories of the broad masses even the little 
bit remaining from distress and misery. 


2.9 THE ORDEAL OF THE WORKER’S CHILD 


Imagine the following scene: 

There is a cellar apartment, and this lodging consists of two damp 
rooms. A workman and his family live in these rooms—seven people in 
all. Let’s assume that one of the children is a 3-year-old boy. That is the 
age at which children first become conscious of the impressions that they 
receive. In the case of highly gifted people, traces of those early 
impressions survive until old age. 

Now, the narrowness and congestion of those living quarters are not 
conducive to pleasant family relations. Quarrels and fits of mutual anger 
thus arise. These people can hardly be said to live with one another, but 
rather on top of one another. Small misunderstandings, ones that would 
disappear in a spacious family home, become here the source of chronic 
disputes. As far as the children are concerned, the situation is tolerable from 
one point of view. In such conditions, they are constantly quarrelling with 
one another, but the quarrels are quickly and entirely forgotten. But when 
the parents endlessly squabble, the daily arguments sink to an unimaginably 
low level. Such experiences must eventually have an effect on the children. 
One must actually live through such an environment to truly picture the 
results of these mutual recriminations—as when the father physically 
assaults the mother and abuses her in a fit of drunken rage. 

At the age of six, the child can no longer ignore these sordid details, 
ones that even an adult would find revolting. Infected with moral poison, 


68 


CHAPTER 2 


bodily undernourished, and a head full of lice, the young ‘citizen’ goes to 
elementary school. With difficulty, he barely learns to read and write. There 
is no possibility of learning any lessons at home. On the contrary. The father 
and mother themselves speak ill of the teacher and school in front of the 
children, and they are far more inclined to insult the teachers than to put 
their child across the knee and knock sound reason into him. What the child 
hears at home only decreases his respect for his fellow citizens. Nothing 
good is said of human nature as a whole, and every institution, from the 
school to the government, is reviled. Whether they speak of religion and 
morals or the State and the social order, it’s all the same; everything is 
disparaged. 

When the young boy leaves elementary school at the age of 14, it 
would be difficult to say what are the most striking features of his character: 
incredible ignorance insofar as real knowledge is concerned, or cynical 
impudence combined with a negative attitude towards morality. For one of 
such a young age, it’s enough to make your hair stand on end. 


2.10 YOUNG DESPISER OF AUTHORITY 


What station in life can such a person fill, to whom nothing is sacred, 
and who has never experienced anything noble—on the contrary, who has 
been intimately acquainted with the lowest kind of human existence? 

This 3-year-old child has become a 15-year-old despiser of authority. 
He has been acquainted only with moral filth and vileness, and everything 
excluded that might stimulate his thought towards higher things. 

And now this young man enters the school of life. 

He leads the same kind of life that was exemplified for him by his 
father during childhood. He hangs around street corners and comes home 
at all hours. He occasionally even beats his poor mother. He curses God 
and the world, and finally ends up in a juvenile corrections center. 

And there he gets his final polish. 

And his bourgeois contemporaries are astonished at the lack of 
‘patriotic enthusiasm’ that this young ‘citizen’ displays. 

Day after day, they are all witnesses to the phenomenon of spreading 
poison among the people, through the use of theater and cinema, gutter 
journalism and obscene books. And yet they are astonished at the 
deplorable ‘moral standards’ and ‘national indifference’ of the masses. As 
if trash cinema, gutter press, and the like could impart knowledge of the 


69 


MEIN KAMPF 


greatness of one’s country—quite apart from the earlier education of the 
individual. 

I then came to understand, quickly and thoroughly, what I had never 
been aware of before. It was the following: 

The question of ‘nationalizing’ a people is first and foremost one of 
establishing healthy social conditions that will furnish the grounds 
necessary for the education of the individual. For only when family 
upbringing and school education have imparted to the individual cultural 
and economic knowledge and, above all, a sense of the political greatness 
of his own country—only then will it be possible for him to feel proud of 
being a citizen. I can fight only for something that I love. I can love only 
what I respect. And in order to respect something, I must at least have some 
knowledge of it. 


2.11 ARCHITECT AND WATERCOLOR PAINTER 


As soon as my interest in social questions was awakened, I began to 
study them in a fundamental way. A new and previously unknown world 
was thus revealed to me. 

In the years 1909-1910, I had so improved my position that I no longer 
had to earn my daily bread as a manual laborer. I was now working 
independently as a draftsman and painter in watercolors. This career was a 
poor one indeed, at least as far as earnings were concerned. I barely had 
enough to meet the necessities of life. Yet it was interesting for me, in light 
of the profession that I aspired to. 

Moreover, when I came home in the evenings, I was now no longer 
dead-tired as before, when I was unable to glance at a book without falling 
asleep almost immediately. My present work was therefore aligned with 
my future profession. Furthermore, I was master of my own time, and could 
distribute my working-hours better now than before. 

I painted to make a living, and I studied for pleasure. 

Thus I was able to acquire theoretical knowledge of the social problem, 
something that was a necessary complement to what I was learning through 
daily experience. I studied all the books I could find that dealt with this 
question, and-I thought deeply about what I read. 

I believe that those around me considered me an eccentric person. 

Apart from my interest in the social question, I naturally devoted 
myself with enthusiasm to the study of architecture. Along side music, I 


70 


CHAPTER 2 


considered it queen of the arts. It was pleasure, not work, to study it. I could 
read or draw until late at night without ever getting tired. And I became 
moreand more confident that my dream of a brilliant future would become 
true, even though I might have to wait years to achieve it. I was firmly 
convinced that one day I would make a name for myself as an architect. 

The fact that, along side my professional studies, I took the greatest 
interest in everything political did not seem to be especially important. On 
the contrary—I looked upon this practical interest in politics as the obvious 
duty of every thinking man. Those who have no understanding of the 
political world around them have no right to criticize or complain. 

I therefore continued to read and study politics extensively. 


2.12 THE ART OF READING 


Reading, however, had a different meaning for me than it has for the 
average run of our so-called ‘intellectuals.’ 

I know people who read endlessly, book after book, from cover to 
cover, and yet I would not call them ‘well-read.’ Of course they ‘know’ an 
immense amount; but their brain seems incapable of sifting and organizing 
the information they have acquired. They don’t have the ability to 
distinguish between what is useful and what is useless. They may retain 
the former in their minds and, if possible, skip over the latter while reading 
it—and if that’s not possible, they will throw it overboard as useless ballast. 

Reading is not an end in itself, but a means to an end. Its chief purpose 
is to help towards filling in the framework that comprises each person’s 
talents and abilities. Thus each one acquires for himself the tools and 
materials needed for the fulfillment of his life’s work—regardless whether 
this is the elementary task of earning one’s daily bread or a calling that 
responds to higher human aspirations. Such is the first purpose of reading. 
And the second purpose is to provide an overall worldview. 

In both cases, however, the information acquired through reading must 
not be stored up in the memory, corresponding to the successive chapters 
of the book. Rather, each little piece of knowledge thus gained must be 
treated as if it were a stone to be inserted into a mosaic, so that it finds its 
proper place among all the other elements that form a general worldview 
in the reader’s mind. Otherwise only a confused jumble of chaotic notions 
will result from all this reading. That jumble is not merely useless, but it 
also tends to make the unfortunate possessor of it conceited. He seriously 


71 


MEIN KAMPF 


thinks himself to be well-educated, and that he understands something of 
life. He believes that he has acquired knowledge, whereas the truth is that 
every increase in such ‘knowledge’ draws him further away from real life— 
until he finally ends up either in some sanatorium or in parliament. 

Such a person never succeeds in making practical use of his knowledge 
when the moment calls for it. His mental equipment is not organized to 
meet the demands of everyday life. His knowledge is stored in his brain as 
a literal transcript of the books he has read, and in the order in which he 
has read them. And if fate should one day call upon him to use his book- 
knowledge, it will have to give him the title and page number—otherwise 
he will never be able to recall the needed information. But if the page is 
not mentioned at the critical moment, the bright boy will find himself in a 
state of hopeless embarrassment. Highly agitated, he searches for 
comparable cases, and it is almost certain that he will finally deliver the 
wrong prescription. 

If that’s an incorrect description, then how can we explain the political 
achievements of our parliamentary heroes, who hold the highest positions 
in government? Otherwise we would have to attribute their actions to 
malice and chicanery, rather than to pathology. 

On the other hand, one who has cultivated the art of reading will 
instantly perceive, in a book or journal or pamphlet, what should be 
remembered—either because it meets one’s needs or it has value in general. 
What he thus learns is incorporated into his mental picture of a problem or 
a thing, further correcting or enlarging it, so that it becomes more exact 
and precise. If some practical problem suddenly demands examination or 
a solution, memory will immediately select the appropriate information 
from the mass that has been acquired through years of reading. Memory 
will also place this information at the service of one’s powers of judgment, 
so as to get a new and clearer view of the problem in question, or to produce 
a definitive solution. 

Only thus can reading have any meaning or purpose. 

For example, a speaker who does not have at hand the sources of 
information that are necessary to a proper treatment of his subject is unable 
to defend his opinions against an opponent, even though those opinions 
may be perfectly solid and true. In every discussion, his memory will 
abandon him. He cannot summon up arguments to support his statements, 
or to refute his opponent. As long as the speaker only has to defend himself, 
the situation is not serious; but the evil comes when fate places such a 
know-it-all—who in reality knows nothing—in charge of a state. 


72 


CHAPTER 2 


From my earliest youth, I tried to read books in the right way, and I 
was fortunate to have good memory and intelligence to assist me. From 
that point of view, my time in Vienna was particularly useful and profitable. 
My experiences of everyday life there were a constant stimulus to study 
the most varied problems in new ways. Inasmuch as I was in a position to 
put theory to the test of reality—and reality to the test of theory—I was 
protected from the danger of pedantic theorizing on the one hand and, on 
the other, from being too impressed by superficial aspects of reality. 

The experience of everyday life at that time forced me to make a 
fundamental theoretical study of the two most important questions—apart 
from the social question. 

It is impossible to say when I might have begun to make a thorough 
study of the doctrine and characteristics of Marxism, were it not for the 
fact that I ran head-first into the problem! 


2.13 SOCIAL DEMOCRACY 


What I knew of Social Democracy? in my youth was precious little— 
and for the most part, wrong. 

The fact that it led the struggle for universal suffrage and the secret 
ballot gave me an inner satisfaction. I then reasoned that this would weaken 
the Habsburg regime, which I so thoroughly detested. I was convinced that 
even if it should sacrifice the German element, the Danube State could not 
continue to exist. Even at the cost of a gradual Slavization of the Austrian 
Germans, the state would not thereby become a durable empire. This was 
because it was very questionable if, and to what degree, the Slavs possessed 
the necessary capacity for constructive politics. I therefore welcomed every 
movement that might lead towards the final disruption of that impossible 
state—one that had condemned 10 million Germans to death. The more 
this Babel of tongues wrought discord and disruption, even in the 
parliament, the nearer the hour came for the dissolution of this Babylonian 
Empire. That would mean the liberation of my German Austrian people. 
Only then would it become possible for them to be reunited with the 
Motherland. 


2 Formally called the Social Democratic Workers’ Party of Austria 
(Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei Osterreichs), or SDAPO. The party was 
founded in 1889 by a Jewish doctor, Victor Adler (1852-1918). From the 
beginning, it was allied to Marxism. 


73 


MEIN KAMPF 


Consequently, I had no feelings of antipathy towards the actual policy 
of the Social Democrats. That its avowed purpose was to raise the level of 
the working classes—which, in my ignorance, I foolishly believed—was 
another factor that spoke in favor of Social Democracy rather than against 
it. But what most repelled me was its hostile attitude towards the struggle 
for the preservation of Germanism in Austria. Also lamentable was its 
courting of the Slavic ‘comrades’—who welcomed this development only 
as long as there were practical advantages. Otherwise, the Slavs maintained 
an arrogant reserve; this gave the fawning beggars their just desserts. 

Thus, at the age of 17, the word ‘Marxism’ was very little known to 
me, while I viewed ‘Social Democracy’ and ‘Socialism’ as synonymous. 
It took a sudden blow from the hand of fate to open my eyes to the nature 
of this unparalleled betrayal of humanity. 

Until then, my acquaintance with the Social Democratic Party was only 
that of a mere spectator at some of their mass meetings. I hadn’t the 
slightest idea of social-democratic teachings or the mindset of its partisans. 
All of a sudden, I was brought face to face with the products of their 
teaching and what they called their Weltanschauung, or worldview. Thus a 
few months sufficed for me to learn something that, under other 
circumstances, might have taken decades of study—namely that, under the 
cloak of social virtue and love of one’s neighbor, a veritable pestilence was 
spreading abroad, and that if this pestilence were not immediately stamped 
out, it might result in the end of the human race on this earth. 

My first contact with the Social Democrats came while working in the 
building trade. 

From the very start, it was none too pleasant for me. My clothes were 
still rather decent; I was careful in speech, and reserved in manner. I was so 
occupied with thinking of my own present lot, and of future possibilities, that 
I took little interest in my immediate surroundings. I sought work in order to 
eat, and also to make progress with my studies—even though it might be 
slow. I may have never bothered to be interested in my surroundings, if it 
weren’t for the fact that, on the third or fourth day, an event occurred that 
forced me to take a definite stand. I was ordered to join the trade union. 

At that time, I knew nothing about them. I had had no opportunity to 
form an opinion on their value, whatever it may be. But when I was told 
that I must join the union, I refused. The reasons I gave were simply that 
I knew nothing about the matter, and that, in any case, I wouldn’t allow 
myself to be forced into anything. The first reason probably saved me from 
being thrown out right away. They likely thought that I might be 


74 


CHAPTER 2, 


‘converted’ in a few days and become more docile. But if they thought 
that, they were deeply mistaken. After two weeks, I found it utterly 
impossible to contemplate, even if I had been willing to join at first. During 
those 14 days, I came to know my fellow workmen better; and no power 
in the world could have forced me to join an organization whose 
representatives had meanwhile shown themselves in such a bad light. 

In the first few days, my resentment was aroused. 

At noon, some of the workers adjourned to the nearest tavern, while 
the others remained on the building premises and ate their midday meal; 
in most cases, it was a very scanty one. These were married men, whose 
wives brought them soup in pathetic bowls. At week’s end, there was a 
gradual increase in the number who stayed to eat on the premises. I later 
understood the reason for this. On these occasions, they talked politics. 

I drank my milk and ate my morsel of bread somewhere off to the side, 
while I either cautiously studied my environment or else reflected on my 
own harsh lot. Yet I heard more than enough. And I often thought that some 
of what they said was meant for my ears, in the hope of drawing me in. 
But all that I heard infuriated me. Everything was disparaged: the nation, 
because it was an invention of the ‘capitalist’ class—how often I had to 
hear that phrase!; the Fatherland, because it was an instrument in the hands 
of the bourgeoisie for the exploitation of the working masses; the authority 
of the law, because that was a means of oppressing the proletariat; religion, 
as a means of doping the people, so as to exploit them afterwards; and 
morality, as a badge of stupid and sheepish docility. There was nothing that 
they didn’t drag through the mud. 

At first I remained silent; but that couldn’t last very long. Then I began 
to take part in the discussion, and to reply to their statements. I recognized, 
however, that this was doomed to failure, as long as I didn’t have at least a 
certain amount of definite information about the questions that were 
discussed. So I decided to examine the sources from which they claimed 
to have drawn their so-called wisdom. I studied book after book, pamphlet 
after pamphlet. 

Meanwhile, we continued to argue with one another. Each day I was 
getting better-informed than my opponents. Then a day came when the 
more fearsome of my adversaries resorted to the weapon that most easily 
triumphs over reason: terror and violence. Some of the leaders among my 
opponents ordered me to leave the building, or else get thrown off the 
scaffolding. Since I was all alone, I couldn’t put up any physical resistance; 
so I chose the first option and departed—but richer by experience. 


75 


MEIN KAMPF 


I went away full of disgust. But at the same time, I was so deeply 
affected that it was quite impossible for me to ignore the whole. situation 
and to stop thinking about it. When my anger began to calm down, my 
spirit of obstinacy got the upper hand and I decided that I would get back 
to work again in the building trade, at all costs. This decision became all 
the stronger a few weeks later, when my meager savings ran out and hunger 
clutched me once again in its merciless arms. I had no alternative. I got 
work again, but I soon had to leave for the same reasons as before. 

Then I asked myself: Are these men worthy of belonging to a great people? 

The question was profoundly disturbing. If the answer was ‘Yes,’ then the 
struggle to defend one’s nationality is hardly worth all the pain and sacrifice 
we demand of our best men, if it only be in the interests of such rabble. On the 
other hand, if the answer was ‘No,’ then we are a nation of pitiful men. 

During those days of mental anguish and deep reflection, I envisioned 
an ever-increasing mass of people who could no longer be reckoned as 
belonging to their own nation. 


2.14 THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PRESS 


It was quite a different feeling a few days later, when I gazed at the 
endless columns, four abreast, of Viennese workmen parading at a mass 
demonstration! I stood dumbfounded for almost two hours, watching that 
enormous human dragon slowly uncoil itself in front of me. When I finally 
left the square and wandered home, I felt dismayed and depressed. 

On my way, I noticed the Arbeiter-Zeitung (The Worker’s Journal) in a 
tobacco shop. This was the chief press-organ of the old Austrian Social 
Democracy. It was also available in a cheap café that I used to visit, and 
where I often went to read the papers. But previously I couldn’t bring myself 
to look at the wretched thing for more than two minutes; its whole tone 
angered me. Depressed by the demonstration I had just seen, an inner voice 
urged me to buy the paper in that tobacco shop and read it through. So I 
brought it home with me and spent the whole evening reading it—despite 
the steadily mounting rage provoked by a ceaseless outpouring of lies. 

I now found that, in the social democratic daily papers, I could study 
the inner nature of their thought-process far better than in all their 
theoretical literature. 

And what a striking difference there was between the two! In the 
literary text that dealt with Social Democracy theory, there was a display 


76 


CHAPTER 2 


of high-sounding phraseology about liberty, human dignity, and beauty. It 
was all promoted with an air of profound wisdom and calm prophetic 
assurance—a meticulously-woven glitter of words to dazzle and mislead 
the reader. On the other hand, the daily press hammered out this new 
doctrine of human redemption in a most brutal fashion. No means were too 
crude, provided they could be exploited in the slanderous campaign. These 
journalists were experts in the art of deception and twisting facts. The 
theoretical literature was intended for the middle- and upper-class 
‘intellectuals,’ whereas the newspaper was intended for the masses. 

This probing into books and newspapers, and studying the teachings 
of Social Democracy, drew me back to my own people. 

And thus what at first seemed an impassable chasm became the 
occasion for a greater love. 

With an understanding of the workings of the colossal system for 
poisoning the popular mind, only a fool could blame the victims. During 
the years that followed, I became more independent and, as I did so, I 
became better able to understand the inner cause of the success of this 
Social Democratic gospel. I now realized the meaning and purpose of those 
brutal orders to read only ‘Red’ books and newspapers, and attend only 
‘Red’ meetings. In the harsh light of reality, I saw the inevitable 
consequences of that intolerant teaching. 

The psyche of the masses is not receptive to anything half-hearted and 
weak. 

There are women whose inner sensibilities are not swayed by abstract 
reasoning but are always subject to the influence of a vague emotional 
longing for the strength that completes their being, and who would rather 
bow to the strong man than dominate the weakling. Similarly, the masses 
prefer the commander to the beggar, and they are filled with a stronger 
sense of security by an unrivaled teaching than by one that offers them a 
choice among many. They have very little idea of how to make such a 
choice. Thus they are prone to feel that they have been abandoned. They 
are equally unaware of their shameless spiritual terrorism and the impudent 
abuse of their freedom; they haven’t the slightest suspicion of the inner 
insanity of the whole doctrine. They see only the ruthless force and brutality 
of its calculated words, to which they always submit. 

If Social Democracy were to be opposed by a more truthful but equally 
brutal teaching, then this truthful teaching will ultimately prevail—even 
though the struggle may be of the bitterest kind. 


77 


MEIN KAMPF 


2.15 SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC TACTICS 


In less than two years, I gained a clear understanding of the doctrine 
and operational technique of Social Democracy. 

I recognized the infamous mental terrorism carried out against the 
bourgeoisie, who are neither morally nor spiritually equipped to withstand 
such attacks. The tactics of Social Democracy consisted in opening, at a 
given signal, a veritable onslaught of lies and slanders against the man 
whom they viewed as their strongest adversary—until his nerves gave way 
and they sacrificed the man who was attacked, simply in the hope of being 
allowed to live in peace. 

But the fools never attained peace. 

The same tactics are repeated again and again, until the fear of these 
mad dogs paralyzes their victims. 

Thus did Social Democracy learn the value of strength, and for that 
reason it attacks mostly those who are of a stronger nature, which is rare 
indeed. On the other hand, it praises every weakling among its opponents, 
more or less cautiously, according to the measure of his mental qualities. 

They have less fear of a man of genius who lacks will-power than of a 
vigorous character with mediocre intelligence. At the same time, they 
highly commend those who are devoid of intelligence and will-power. 

~ The Social Democrats know how to create the impression that they alone 
are the protectors of peace. In this way, acting very circumspectly but never 
losing sight of their ultimate goal, they conquer one position after another— 
now by methods of quiet intimidation and now by sheer daylight robbery. 
They employ these tactics at those moments when public attention is tumed 
towards other matters, or when the public considers an incident too trivial to 
raise a fuss about and thus provoke the anger of a vicious opponent. 

These tactics are based on an accurate estimation of human 
weaknesses; they will lead to success, with almost mathematical certainty, 
unless the other side also learns how to fight poison gas with poison gas. 

The weaker natures must be told that this is a case of ‘to be or not to 
be.’ 

I also came to understand that physical terror has its significance for 
both the masses and the individual. 

Here again the Socialists accurately calculated the psychological effect. 

Terror in workshops and in factories, in assembly halls and at mass 
demonstrations, will always meet with success, as long as it does not 
encounter the same kind of terror in a stronger form. 


78 


CHAPTER 2 


In this case, the party will surely cry bloody murder. It will appeal to 
the authority of the state, though they have previously repudiated it. In 
doing so, their aim is to add to the general confusion, so that they may have 
a better chance of reaching their own goal unobserved. They will search 
for some idiot among the higher government officials, one who hopes to 
ingratiate himself with them, and who will help this world-pest defeat its 
opponents. 

The impression that such successful tactics make on the minds of the 
masses, whether they be supporters or opponents, can be estimated only 
by one who knows the popular mind—practically, not theoretically. 
Successes that are thus won are taken by Social Democrats as a triumphant 
symbol of the righteousness of their own cause. On the other hand, the 
defeated opponent very often loses faith in the effectiveness of any further 
resistance. 

The more I understood the methods of physical terror that were 
employed, the more sympathy I had for the multitude that had succumbed 
to it. 

I am grateful now for that time of suffering. It allowed me to think 
kindly again of my own people; and it enabled me to distinguish between 
the false leaders and the victims who were led astray. 

We must look upon the latter simply as victims. I have just now tried 
to depict some of the mental traits of those on the lowest rung of the social 
ladder. But my picture would be unbalanced if I do not add that, amid the 
social depths, I still found light. I experienced a rare spirit of self-sacrifice 
and loyal comradeship among those men, who demanded little from life 
and were content amid their modest surroundings. This was true especially 
of the older generation of workmen. And although these qualities were 
disappearing from the younger generation, due to the pervasive influence 
of the big city, yet even among them, there were many who were sound at 
the core, and who were able to keep themselves uncontaminated amid the 
sordid surroundings of their everyday existence. 

If these men—who in many cases were upright and well-meaning— 
supported the politics of their common enemy, it was because those decent 
workmen did not and could not grasp the baseness of the doctrine taught 
by the socialist agitators. Additionally, no other sector of society worried 
much about the working classes. Finally, social conditions were such that 
men who otherwise would have acted differently were forced to submit to 
them, if unwillingly at first. The day came when poverty gained the upper 
hand and drove those workmen into the Social Democratic camp. 


79 


MEIN KAMPF 


2.16 SINS OF THE BOURGEOISIE 


On many occasions, the bourgeoisie took a definite stand against even 
the most reasonable demands of the working classes. Such conduct was ill- 
considered and indeed immoral; it could bring no gain whatsoever to the 
bourgeois class. The result was that the honest workman was dragged out 
of the trade-union organization and into politics. 

Millions of workers surely began with hostility to the Social 
Democratic Party; but their defenses were repeatedly attacked, and finally 
they had to surrender. But this outcome was due to the stupidity of the 
bourgeois parties, who opposed every social demand put forth by the 
working class. Bourgeois leaders’ tactics included: a short-sighted refusal 
to make an effort towards improving labor conditions; a refusal to adopt 
accident insurance for factory workers; a refusal to forbid child labor; 
and a refusal to consider protective measures for women workers, 
especially pregnant ones. These leaders were thankful for every 
opportunity that they could exploit for forcing the masses into their net. 
Our bourgeois parties can never repair the damage that resulted from 
these mistakes. They sowed the seeds of hatred when they opposed all 
efforts at social reform. And thus they gave, at least, apparent grounds to 
justify the Social Democrats’ claim that they, alone, stood up for the 
interests of the working class. 

And this became the principal ground for the justification of the 
existence of the trade unions; thus they became, from that time onward, 
the chief political recruiting tool for growing the ranks of the Social 
Democratic Party. 


2.17 THE TRADE-UNION QUESTION 


During my years in Vienna, I was forced—whether I liked it or not— 
to take a position on the trade unions. 

Because I saw them as inseparable from the Social Democratic Party, 
my decision was hasty—and mistaken. 

I rejected them as a matter of course. 

But on this essential question, fate intervened and taught me a lesson. 

As a result, I changed my initial opinion. 

When I was 20 years old, I learned to distinguish between the trade 
unions as, on the one hand, a means of defending the social rights of the 


80 


CHAPTER 2 


employees and fighting for better living conditions and, on the other, as a 
political instrument used by the party in the class struggle. 

The Social Democrats understood the enormous importance of the 
trade union movement. They appropriated it as a tool and used it with 
success, while the bourgeois parties failed to understand it and thus lost 
political prestige. They thought that their own arrogant ‘rejection’ would 
arrest the logical development of the movement, forcing it into an illogical 
position. 

But it is absurd and false to say that the trade union movement is, in 
itself, hostile to the nation. Rather, the opposite is true. If the activities of 
the trade union are directed towards improving the condition of the 
working-class, and are successful, such activities are not against the 
Fatherland or the state but are, in the truest sense of the word, national. In 
this way, the trade union organization helps to create social conditions that 
are indispensable for a general system of national education. It deserves 
high recognition when it destroys the intellectual and physical germs of 
social disease, and thus promotes the general welfare of the nation. 

It is superfluous to ask whether the trade union is necessary. 

As long as there are employers who lack social understanding and have 
wrong ideas of justice and fair play, it is not only the right but also the duty 
of their employees—who are, after all, an integral part of our people—to 
protect the public interest from individual greed and irrationality. To 
safeguard the loyalty and confidence of the people is as much in the 
interests of the nation as to safeguard public health. 

Both are seriously menaced by dishonorable employers, who are 
unaware of their duty as members of a national community. Their personal 
greed or ruthlessness sows the seeds of future trouble. 

To eliminate the causes of such a development is truly a service to the 
nation. 

One must not say that the individual worker is always free to escape 
from the consequences of a perceived or actual injustice by an employer— 
in other words, that he is free to leave. No! That argument is only a ruse to 
distract from the question at hand. Is it, or is it not, in the interests of the 
nation to remove the causes of social unrest? If it is, then the fight must be 
carried on with the only weapons that might prevail. But the individual 
worker is never in a position to stand up against the power of the big 
employer. The question here is not one that concerns the victory of that 
which is right. If this were the guiding principle, then the conflict would 
never have arisen. Rather, it is a question of who is stronger. If the case 


81 


MEIN KAMPF 


were otherwise, justice alone would solve the dispute in an honorable way— 
or, more precisely, such matters would not have come to dispute at all. 

No. If unsocial and unjust treatment of men provokes resistance, then, 
until legislative action is taken to alleviate the situation, the stronger party 
can simply impose its will. Therefore it is evident that if the individual 
worker is to have any chance at all of winning, he must join together with 
his fellow workers and present a united front to the individual employer. 
For his part, the employer incorporates in his own person the collective 
strength of the vested interests in the industrial or commercial undertaking 
that he manages. 

Thus the trade unions can hope to promote and strengthen a sense of 
social responsibility in the typical work-life, and can open the way to 
practical results. In doing this, they tend to remove those causes of friction 
that are a continual source of dissatisfaction and complaint. 

If this is not so, it is largely the fault of those who blocked the path to 
legislative social reform, or rendered such a reform ineffective by 
sabotaging it through their political influence. 


2.18 POLITICIZATION OF THE TRADE UNIONS 


The political bourgeoisie failed to understand—or rather, did not wish 
to understand—the importance of the trade union movement. The Social 
Democrats thereby took advantage of this mistake and pulled the labor 
movement under their sole protection, without any protest. Thus they 
established for themselves a solid foundation of support. Correspondingly, 
the real purpose of the union movement gradually fell into oblivion, and 
was replaced by new objectives. 

It never occurred to the Social Democrats that they should respect the 
original purpose of the union movement. 

No, that was never their intention. 

Within a few decades, the trade union movement was transformed, by 
the expert hand of Social Democracy, from an instrument that was 
originally created for the defense of human rights into one for the 
destruction of the national economic structure..Working-class interests were 
never respected, even for amoment. In politics, the application of economic 
blackmail is always possible if the one side is sufficiently unscrupulous 
and the other sufficiently docile. 

In this case, both conditions were fulfilled. 


82 


CHAPTER 2, 


By the turn of the century, the trade union movement had already ceased 
to serve its original function. Year after year, it fell more and more under the 
political control of the Social Democrats, until finally it became a battering- 
ram in the class struggle. The plan was to shatter, by means of constantly 
repeated blows, the economic foundation of a carefully constructed system. 
Once this was achieved, the destruction of the state would soon follow, 
because it was already deprived of its economic foundations. 

Social-Democratic attention to the real interests of the working-classes 
steadily decreased, until the cunning leaders saw that it would serve their 
immediate political interests if the demands of the masses remained 
unheeded; there was a danger that, if they became content, the masses could 
no longer be used as mere passive material in the political struggle. 

The gloomy prospect that presented itself to the leaders of the class 
warfare—that the masses might no longer be used as a weapon of war— 
created so much anxiety among them that they suppressed and opposed 
even the most basic measures of social reform. 

And conditions were such that those leaders had no trouble justifying 
such an illogical policy. 

As the public demands increased, the possibility of satisfying them 
dwindled. Whatever small measure were taken became more and more 
insignificant. Ultimately they were able to persuade the masses that these 
small actions represented a diabolical plan to weaken their fighting power, 
and perhaps even to paralyze it. Considering the stupidity of the masses, 
we shouldn’t be surprised at the success of these methods. 

The bourgeois camp was indignant over the bad faith of the Social 
Democratic tactics; but they did nothing to draw the practical conclusion 
and organize a counter attack from the bourgeois side. The fear that the 
Social Democrats might truly raise the working-classes out of misery 
should have induced the bourgeois parties to make the most strenuous 
efforts in this direction—thus snatching the most important weapon from 
the hands of the class-warfare leaders. 

But this was not done. 

Instead of attacking their opponent’s position, the bourgeoisie allowed 
itself to be pressed and harried. Finally it adopted means that were so late 
and so insignificant that they were ineffective—and consequently 
repudiated. So the whole situation remained just as it was before; but the 
discontent was greater. 

Like a threatening storm-cloud, the ‘free trade union’ hovered over the 
political horizon and over the life of each individual. 


83 


MEIN KAMPF 


It was one of the most frightful instruments of terror; it threatened the 
security and independence of the national economic structure, the 
foundations of the state, and individual liberty. 

Above all, it was the ‘free trade union’ that turned democracy into a 
ridiculous and scored phrase, and insulted the ideal of liberty. It also 
stigmatized the notion of brotherhood with the slogan ‘If you won’t become 
our comrade, we will crack your skull.’ 

This was how I came to know this ‘friend’ of humanity. During the 
years that followed, my knowledge of it became wider and deeper—but it 
hasn’t fundamentally changed. 


2.19 THE KEY TO SOCIAL DEMOCRACY 


The more I became acquainted with the external forms of Social 
Democracy, the greater was my desire to understand the inner nature of its 
doctrines. 

Official party literature was not very useful. On economic questions, 
its statements were false and its proofs unsound. In treating of political 
aims, its attitude was insincere. Furthermore, its modern methods of 
chicanery in the presentation of its arguments were profoundly repugnant 
to me. Its flamboyant sentences, its obscure and incomprehensible phrases, 
pretended to contain great thoughts, but they were devoid of thought, and 
meaningless. One would have to be a decadent urban Bohemian in order 
to be comfortable in that maze of aberrant reasoning, so that he might 
discover an ‘inner experience’ amid this dung-heap of literary Dadaism. 
They were obviously counting on the proverbial humility of certain of our 
people, who believe that incomprehensibility equals wisdom. 

In confronting the theoretical falsity and absurdity of that doctrine with 
the reality of the phenomenon, I gradually acquired a clear picture of its aims. 

At such times, I was overcome by dark forebodings and fear of 
something evil. I saw before me a teaching inspired by egoism and hatred, 
mathematically calculated to win a victory—but the triumph of which 
would be a mortal blow to humanity. 

Meanwhile, I discovered the relationship between this destructive 
teaching and the specific character of a people who, up to that time, were 
almost completely unknown to me. 


84 


CHAPTER 2 


2.20 THE JEWISH QUESTION 


Knowledge of the Jews is the only key whereby one may understand 
the inner nature, and therefore the real aims, of Social Democracy. 

The man who comes to know this race succeeds in removing a veil 
from his eyes, one that shows the aims and meaning of this party in a false 
light. And then, out of the fog and mist of socialist ep pEnsey: rises the 
grinning figure of Marxism. 

It is difficult, ifnot impossible, for me to now say when the word ‘Jew’ 
first began to raise any particular thought in my mind. I don’t remember 
even having heard the word at home during my father’s lifetime. If it were 
mentioned in a derogatory sense, I think the old man would just have 
considered those who used it to be culturally backward. In his career, he 
became more or less a cosmopolitan, with strong views on nationalism, 
which had its effect on me as well. 

In school, too, I found no reason to change the picture of things I had 
formed at home. 

At the Realschule, | knew one Jewish boy. We were all on guard in our 
relations with him; his reticence and certain of his actions warned us to be 
discreet. Beyond that, my schoolmates and I had no particular opinions 
about him. 

It was not until I was 14 or 15 years old that I frequently ran up against 
the word ‘Jew,’ partly in connection with political controversies. These 
references aroused a mild distaste in me, and an uncomfortable feeling 
always came over me when J had to listen to religious disputes. 

But at that time, I had no other feelings about the Jewish question. 

There were very few Jews in Linz. Over the centuries, the Jews who 
lived there had become Europeanized in external appearance, and were so 
much like other people that I even looked upon them as Germans. The 
reason why I didn’t then perceive the absurdity of such an illusion was that 
I saw no other distinguishing feature but the strange religion. I believed 
that they were persecuted on account of their faith, and my aversion at 
hearing such remarks nearly grew into a feeling of abhorrence. 

I hadn’t the slightest idea that there could be such a thing as a 
systematic anti-Semitism. 

Then I came to Vienna. 

Preoccupied by the mass of impressions I received from the 
architectural surroundings, and depressed by my own troubles, I did not at 
first distinguish the different social strata of that huge city. Although Vienna 


85 


MEIN KAMPF 


then had about 200,000 Jews among its population of 2 million, I didn’t 
notice them.? During my first few weeks there, my eyes and my mind were 
unable to cope with the onrush of new ideas and values. Not until I 
gradually became accustomed to my surroundings, and the confused picture 
began to grow clearer, did I gain a more discriminating view of my new 
world. It was then that I came upon the Jewish question. 

I won’t say that the manner of my initial acquaintance with it was 
particularly unpleasant. I saw in the Jew only a man of a different religion. 
Therefore, on grounds of human tolerance, I opposed the idea that he 
should be attacked because he had a different faith. And so I considered 
the anti-Semitic press in Vienna to be unworthy of the cultural traditions 
of a great people. The memory of certain events that happened in the 
Middle Ages came to mind, and I felt that they should not be repeated.4 
Generally speaking, these anti-Semitic newspapers did not have a good 
reputation—though at the time, I didn’t understand why—and so I regarded 
them more as the products of jealousy and envy rather than the expression 
of a sincere, though perhaps mistaken, outlook. 


2.21 THE SO-CALLED WORLD PRESS 


My own opinions were confirmed by what I considered to be the 
infinitely more dignified manner in which the big papers replied to those 
attacks—or even better, simply ignored them. 

I diligently read the so-called ‘world press’-—Neue Freie Presse, 
Wiener Tagblatt, etc.\—and I was astonished by the abundance of 


3 Jewish population in Vienna was just 6,000 in 1860, but increased rapidly in 
the latter half of the 19th century: 40,200 in 1870; 118,000 in 1890; and 
147,000 in 1900. By 1922, it was over 200,000. 

4 Jews were expelled from several European countries in the Middle Ages, 
including England (1290), France (1306), Spain (1492), and Italy (1593). They 
were initially expelled from Vienna in 1420. A second explusion occurred in 
1669, under Leopold I. The 1782 ‘Edict of Tolerance’ permitted Jews to return 
to Austria and granted them limited civil rights. 

5 The Neue Freie Presse was co-founded by a Jewish journalist, Max 
Friedlander, in 1864. Among its correspondents were notorious Zionists Max 
Nordau and Theodor Herzl. During Hitler’s day, the paper was run by the 
Jewish businessman Moriz Benedikt. The Wiener Tagblatt was run by a Jewish 
industrialist, Rudolf Sieghart. 


86 


CHAPTER 2 


information they gave their readers, and the impartial way that they 
presented particular problems. I appreciated their dignified tone. But 
sometimes the flamboyant style was unconvincing, and I didn’t like it. Even 
so, I attributed all this to the overpowering influence of the whole 
metropolis. 

Since I considered Vienna at that time as just such a world metropolis, 
I thought this fact sufficient to excuse these shortcomings of the press. 

But I was frequently disgusted by the undignified manner in which this 
press curried favor with the Court. They were either presenting everything 
that happened at the Hofburg in glorious tones or lamenting the critics of 
Wilhelm II.° It was a foolish practice, one that—especially when it had to 
do with ‘The Wisest Monarch of all Time’—reminded me of the mating 
dance of the mountain cock. 

The whole thing seemed artificial. 

In my eyes, it was a stain on the ideal of liberal democracy. 

To curry favor at the Court like this, and in such an indecent manner, 
was unworthy of the nation. 

This was the first shadow to darken my appreciation of the ‘great’ 
Vienna press. 


2.22 CRITICISM OF KAISER WILHELM II 


While in Vienna, I continued to follow all the events that were taking 
place in Germany with an ardent zeal—regardless if they were political or 
cultural questions. I had a feeling of pride and admiration when I contrasted 
the rise of the young Reich with the decline of the Austrian state. But even 
though the Reich’s overall foreign policy was pleasing, the internal political 
situation was not always so good. 

I didn’t approve of the struggle against Wilhelm II. I regarded him not 
only as the German Emperor but, above all, as the creator of the German 
Navy. The fact that the Kaiser was prohibited from speaking in the 
Reichstag made me very angry, because the prohibition came from those 
with no authority to do so. At a single sitting, those same parliamentary 
imbeciles cackled together more than did the whole dynasty of emperors— 
even including the weakest—in the course of centuries. 


6 Kaiser Wilhelm II (1859-1942) ruled Germany as its last emperor from 1888 to 
1918. He was effectively forced to abdicate at the close of WWI. 


87 


MEIN KAMPF 


I was outraged that, in a nation where any half-wit could claim for 
himself the right to criticize others as a ‘legislator’ in the Reichstag, the 
bearer of the imperial crown was himself subject to reprimand by the most 
miserable assembly of drivellers that has ever existed. 

I was even more disgusted at the way this same Viennese press pandered 
to the every rickety horse in the Court, and then flew into wild ecstasies of 
joy if he wagged his tail in response. At the same time, these very newspapers 
displayed anxiety at anything to do with the German Emperor—all the while 
trying to hide their enmity. But to me, it was poorly cloaked. Of course, they 
denied any intention of meddling in Germany’s internal affairs—God forbid. 
They pretended that, by touching these wounds in a friendly way, they were 
both fulfilling the duties of the mutual alliance between the two countries 
and were also meeting their journalistic obligations. Having thus excused 
themselves, they then poked their finger ruthlessly into the wound. 

That sort of thing made my blood boil. 

I then began to be increasingly on guard when reading the great Viennese 
press. 


2.23 TRANSFORMATION INTO AN ANTI-SEMITE 


I had to acknowledge, however, that on such subjects, one of the anti- 
Semitic papers—the Deutsche Volksblatt—acted more decently. 

One thing that got on my nerves was the disgusting manner in which 
the big newspapers cultivated admiration for France. One really had to feel 
ashamed of being a German when confronted by those saccharine hymns 
of praise for ‘the great cultural nation.’ This wretched Francophilia more 
than once made me throw away one of those ‘world newspapers.’ On such 
occasions, I often turned to the Volksblatt, which was much smaller in size 
but which treated such subjects more decently. I disagreed with its sharp 
anti-Semitic tone; but I found, again and again, that its arguments gave me 
grounds for serious thought. 

Anyhow, it was as a result of such readings that I came to know the 
man and the movement that determined Vienna’s fate. These were Dr. Karl 
Lueger and the Christian Socialist Movement.’ 


7 Karl Lueger (1844-1910) was the popular mayor of Vienna from 1897 to his 
death in 1910. He was also co-founder, in 1891, of the Christian Socialist Party 
of Austria. From 1920 onward, Christian Socialism was the dominant party in 
Austria. Upon the Anschluss with Germany in 1938, the party was dissolved. 


88 


CHAPTER 2 


When J arrived in Vienna, I was opposed to both. 

I viewed both the man and the movement as ‘reactionary.’ 

But even an elementary sense of justice forced me to change my 
opinion when I had the opportunity to know the man and his work. Slowly, 
as I developed a stronger basis for judgment, that opinion grew into 
outspoken admiration. Today, more than ever, I hold this man Lueger as 
the preeminent type of German mayor. 

So many of my basic principles were overthrown by this change in my 
attitude towards the Christian-Socialist movement! 

My ideas about anti-Semitism also changed in the course of time, and 
this was my most difficult transformation. 

It cost me a great internal struggle, and it was only after a long battle 
between reason and sentiment that the former emerged victorious. Two 
years later, sentiment rallied to the side of reason and became its faithful 
guardian and advisor. 

At the time of this bitter struggle between calm reason and my spiritual 
sentiments, the lessons that I learned on the Vienna streets proved to be 
invaluable. A time came when I no longer passed blindly along the streets 
of the mighty city; now my eyes were open to both buildings and human 
beings. 

Once, while passing through the inner city, I suddenly encountered an 
apparition in a long caftan and wearing black hair-locks. 

My first thought was: Is this also a Jew? 

They certainly didn’t have this appearance in Linz. I watched the man 
stealthily and cautiously; but the longer I gazed at the strange face and 
examined it feature by feature, the more that my first question became a 
new question: 

Is this also a German? 

As was always my habit in such cases, I turned to books for help in 
removing my doubts. For the first time in my life, I bought some anti- 
Semitic pamphlets for a few cents. But unfortunately they all began by 
assuming that the reader had at least some degree of knowledge about the 
Jewish question, or was at least familiar with it. Moreover, the tone of most 
of these pamphlets made me skeptical once again, both because they were 
partly superficial and because their ‘proofs’ were incredibly unscientific. 

For weeks, and even months, I returned to my old way of thinking. 

The subject appeared so enormous, and the accusations so far-reaching, 
that I was afraid of dealing with it unfairly; and so I again became anxious 
and uncertain. 


89 


MEIN KAMPF 


Yet I could no longer doubt that this was not a question of Germans 
who happened to be of a different religion, but rather one of an entirely 
different people. As soon as I began to investigate the matter and observe 
the Jews, Vienna then appeared to me in a different light. Wherever I went, 
I saw Jews.® And the more I saw of them, the more strikingly and clearly 
they stood out as a different people from the other citizens. Especially the 
inner city and the districts north of the Danube, swarmed with a people 
who, even in outer appearance, had no similarity to the Germans. 

Whatever doubts I may still have had at that point were finally removed 
by the activities of a certain section of the Jews themselves. 

There was a great movement among them, well-represented in Vienna, 
and which strongly confirmed the national character of Jewry: this was 
Zionism.? 

From outward appearances, it seemed as if only part of the Jews 
championed this movement, while the great majority disapproved of or 
even repudiated it. But a close examination showed that those appearances 
were deliberately misleading. They emerged from a fog of theories that 
were produced for reasons of expediency, if not outright deception. The 
so-called liberal Jews did not reject the Zionists as if non-Jews, but only as 
brother Jews with an impractical or even dangerous way of promoting 
Jewry. 

There was no real conflict in their inner nature. 

This fictitious conflict between the Zionists and the liberal Jews soon 
disgusted me; it was thoroughly false, and in direct contradiction to the 
moral dignity and immaculate character on which that people had always 
prided itself. 

Cleanliness, whether moral or otherwise, has its own peculiar meaning 
for these people. That they were not water-lovers was obvious upon first 
glance, and unfortunately, often also when not looking at them at all. The 
odor of those people in caftans often made me sick to my stomach.'° 


8 By the 1920s, Jews were roughly 10 percent of the Viennese population— 
though in certain districts, they exceeded SO percent. 

° Zionism may be defined as the movement to establish a Jewish homeland in 
Palestine. It was founded in 1899, and rapidly grew during the first few decades 
of the 20th century. 

There is a long history of negative commentary on ‘the Jewish stench,’ dating 
back to the Roman poet Martial (ca. 100 AD). Among the more recent 
commentators was Arthur Schopenhauer, who issued a number of biting remarks 
on the “foetor Judaicus.” 


90 


CHAPTER 2 


Beyond that, there were the unkempt clothes and the generally ignoble 
appearance. 

All these details were certainly not attractive. But the truly revolting 
feature was that, beneath their unclean exterior, one suddenly perceived 
the moral rot of this ‘chosen people.”!! 

What soon gave me cause for serious thought, with a slowly rising 
insight, were the activities of the Jews in certain fields of life. 

Was there any shady undertaking, any form of nastiness—especially 
in cultural life—in which at least one Jew did not participate?!” 

On putting the probing knife carefully to that kind of abscess, one 
immediately discovers, like a maggot in a rotting corpse, often blinded by 
the dazzling light: a little Jew. 

In my eyes, the charge against Jewry became a grave one the moment 
I discovered their activities in the press, art, literature, and the theater. All 
protests to the contrary were now essentially futile. One needed only to 
look at the posters announcing the monstrous productions of the cinema 
and theater, and study the names of the authors who were so highly praised 
there, in order to become permanently unwavering. 

Here was a pestilence, a moral pestilence, with which the public was 
being infected—one worse than the Black Death. And in what mighty 
doses this poison was manufactured and distributed! Naturally, the lower 
the moral and intellectual level of such artists, the more inexhaustible their 
fecundity. Sometimes it happened that these fellows, acting like a sewage 
pump, would spew their filth directly in the face of humanity. We must 
recall that there is no limit to the number of such people. One must realize 
that, for every Goethe, nature may bring into existence 10,000 despoilers, 
who act as germ-carriers of the worst sort, poisoning human souls. 

'! “For you are a people holy to the Lorp your God. The Lor your God has 
chosen you to be a people for his own possession, out of all the peoples that are 
on the face of the earth” (Deut 7:6). The idea of a people being “chosen” by 
God was a religious innovation of Judaism; no other religion was so self- 
centered. It naturally prompted Jews to think of themselves as special, different, 
and better than others. And it led directly to the idea that the Jews harbored “a 
hatred of all mankind”—a view noted by Hecateus, Tacitus, and many other 
observers over the centuries. See Dalton (2011) for an elaboration. 

!2 Jews have long been prominent in ethically dubious industries, including 
usury, Slavery, war-profiteering, alcohol, drugs, gambling, and pornography. 
For details, see Davis (2012), Nation of Islam (1991), Gertzman (1999), 
Darkmoon (2014), and Joyce (2015). 


91 


MEIN KAMPF 


It was a terrible thought—and yet it couldn’t be avoided, that most of 
the Jews seemed particularly destined by nature to play this shameful role. 

Is this why they can be called ‘the chosen people’? 

I then began to carefully investigate the names of all the fabricators of 
these filthy cultural products. As a result, I became even more disgusted 
with the Jews than I was previously. Even if my feelings might resist a 
thousand times, reason now had to draw its own conclusions. 

The fact was that 90 percent of all the filthy literature, artistic trash, 
and theatrical idiocy had to be charged to the account of a people who 
formed scarcely one percent of the nation. This fact could not be denied. It 
was there, and had to be admitted. 

Then I began to examine my beloved ‘world press’ from a different 
point of view. 

The deeper I probed, the lesser grew my respect for that press that I 
formerly admired. Its style became even more repellent, and I was forced 
to reject its ideas as entirely shallow and superficial. The claim that it 
impartially presented facts and ideas was more lie than truth. And the 
writers were—Jews. 

Thousands of details that I scarcely noticed before now came to deserve 
new attention. I began to grasp and understand things differently than I had 
before. 

I now saw the liberal press in a different light. Its dignified tone in 
replying to its opponents’ attacks, and its dead silence on other issues, now 
became clear to me as part of a cunning and despicable way of deceiving 
the reader. Its brilliant theatrical criticisms always praised the Jewish 
authors, whereas its negative criticism was reserved exclusively for the 
Germans. The gentle pinpricks against Wilhelm II showed the persistency 
of its policy, as did its systematic praise of French culture and civilization. 
The subject matter of the short story was trashy and often indecent. The 
entire language of this press had the accent of a foreign people. The general 
tone was so openly derogatory to the Germans that it must have been 
intentional. 

In whose interest was this? 

Was all this merely an accident? 

My doubts gradually increased. 


92 


CHAPTER 2, 


2.24 THE JEW AS LEADER OF SOCIAL DEMOCRACY 


Then something happened that accelerated my insight. I began to see 
the deeper meaning of a whole series of events that were taking place. All 
these were inspired by a general concept of ethics and morals that were 
openly practiced by a majority of the Jews—one that had practical 
applications. 

Here again, life on the streets taught me what evil really is. 

The relationship of the Jews to prostitution and, even more, to human 
trafficking, could be studied here better than in any other West European 
city—with the possible exception of certain ports in southern France. 
Walking at night along the streets of the Leopoldstadt, at almost every turn, 
whether one wished it or not, one witnessed certain happenings that were 
unknown to most Germans—at least, until the war made it possible, or 
rather inevitable, to see such things on the Eastern front. 

A cold shiver ran down my spine when I first realized that it was the 
cold-blooded, shameless, and calculating Jew who skillfully directed this 
revolting exploitation of the scum of the big city. 

Then I became enraged. 

I no longer hesitated about bringing up the Jewish question. No; now 
I sought it. As I learned to track down the Jew in many different spheres of 
cultural and artistic life—and in various manifestations of life 
everywhere—I suddenly found him where I least expected to. 

I now realized that the Jews were the leaders of Social Democracy. 
With that revelation, the scales fell from my eyes. My long inner struggle 
was at an end. 

In my relations with my fellow workers, I was often astonished at how 
easily and often they changed their opinions on the same questions— 
sometimes within a few days, and sometimes even within a few hours. I 
found it difficult to understand how men who were reasonable as 
individuals suddenly lost this ability as soon as they acted as a mass. This 
phenomenon often tempted me to despair. I argued with them for hours, 
and when I succeeded in bringing them to what I considered a reasonable 
way of thinking, I celebrated my success. But the next day, I found that it 
was all in vain. It was disgusting to have to begin all over again. Like an 
eternal pendulum, they would swing back to their absurd opinions. 

All this was understandable. They were dissatisfied with their lot and 
cursed the fate that hit them so hard. They hated their employers, whom 
they looked upon as the heartless administrators of their cruel destiny. They 


93 


MEIN KAMPF 


often used abusive language against public officials, whom they accused 
of being completely unsympathetic to the situation of working people. They 
conducted public protests against the cost of living, and paraded through 
the streets in defense of their claims. 

All this, at least, could be reasonably explained. But impossible to 
explain was the boundless hatred against their fellow citizen—how they 
disparaged their own nation, mocked its greatness, reviled its history, and 
dragged the names of its most illustrious men through the gutter. 

This hostility towards their own kind, their own native land and home, 
was as irrational as it was incomprehensible. It was deeply unnatural. 

One could temporarily cure this malady, but only for a few days or 
some weeks. But upon later meeting those were converted, one found that 
they were the same as before. 

That unnatural illness once again possessed them. 

I gradually discovered that the Social Democratic press was 
predominantly controlled by Jews. But I didn’t attach special importance 
to this circumstance because the same state of affairs existed in the other 
newspapers. But there was one striking fact: not a single newspaper 
connected to the Jews could be called ‘national’—as I understood the term. 

I swallowed my disgust and tried to read this type of Marxist press; 
but in doing so, my revulsion increased all the more. I then set about 
learning something of the people who wrote and published this mischievous 
stuff. 

From the publisher on down, they were all Jews. 

I grabbed all the Social Democratic pamphlets I could find, and 
checked the names of their authors: Jews. I noted the names of all the 
leaders; most of them were also members of ‘the chosen people.’ It didn’t 
matter if they were representatives in the Reichsrat or trade union 
secretaries, organizational heads or street agitators. Everywhere it was 
always the same sinister picture. I’ll never forget the list of names: 
Austerlitz, David, Adler, Ellenbogen, and others.!° 


'3 Friedrich Austerlitz (1862-1931) was a journalist, editor of the Arbeiter- 
Zeitung, and active SDAPO member. Wilhelm Ellenbogen (1863-1951) was a 
doctor, SDAPO activist, and member of the Austrian National Assembly. 
‘Adler’ is ambiguous; it may refer to Victor Adler, founder of SDAPO; or his 
brother Max Adler (1873-1937), the noted Marxist; or Victor’s son Friedrich 
Adler (1879-1960), secretary-general of SDAPO and member of the Austrian 
National Council (this latter Adler became well-known for assassinating a 
leading Austrian politician, Karl von Stiirgkh, in 1916). The reference to 


94 


CHAPTER 2 


One fact became quite evident to me: that this alien people held in its 
hands the leadership of the Social Democratic Party, with whose minor 
representatives I had been disputing for months. I was happy to finally 
know for certain that the Jew is not a German. 

Only then did I truly understand who the evil seducers of our people 
were. 

A single year of my sojourn in Vienna sufficed to convince me that no 
worker is so rooted in his preconceptions that he will not surrender them 
to better and clearer arguments and explanations. Gradually I became an 
expert in Marxist doctrine. I used this knowledge as an instrument to drive 
home my own firm convictions. 

Success was almost always on my side. 


2.25 JEWISH DIALECTICS 


The great masses can be rescued, but only by sacrificing much time 
and patience. 

But a Jew can never be parted from his opinions. 

It was simple enough, at that time, to try to show them the absurdity of 
their teaching. Within my small circle, I talked to them until my throat 
ached and my voice grew hoarse. I believed that I could finally convince 
them of the danger inherent in Marxist foolishness. But I only achieved the 
contrary result. It seemed that the more they understood the destructiveness 
of Social-Democratic doctrine and its consequences, the more firmly they 
clung to it. 

The more I debated with them, the more familiar I became with their 
argumentative tactics. At the outset they counted upon the stupidity of their 
opponents; but when they got so tied up that they couldn’t find a way out, 
they played the trick of acting as innocent simpletons. Should that fail, in 
spite of their tricks of logic, they acted as if they couldn’t understand the 
counter arguments, and jumped away to another topic of discussion. They 


‘David’ is ambiguous and unknown. 

Hitler might have mentioned other Jewish names as well: Helene Bauer, 
Otto Braun, Heinrich Braun, Julius Braunthal, Hugo Breitner, Robert 
Danneberg, Julius Deutsch, Gustav Eckstein, Rudolf Hilferding, Sigmund Kaff, 
Benno Karpeles, Oskar Pollak, Therese Schlesinger, Friedrich Stampfer, and 
Julius Tandler. All these individuals were “Social Democratic leaders with 
Jewish backgrounds” (Maderthaner and Silverman 2009: 79). 


95 


MEIN KAMPF 


stated truisms and platitudes; and if you accepted these, they applied them 
to other matters of an essentially different nature. If you pointed this out, 
they escaped again and avoided any precise statement. Whenever one tried 
to get a firm grip on one of these apostles, one’s hand grasped only a jelly- 
like slime—that slipped through the fingers, and then recombined into a 
solid mass a moment later. 

But if you really struck a blow on one of these adversaries and, due to 
the audience present, he had to concede the point, a surprise was in store 
for you the following day. The Jew would be utterly oblivious to what had 
happened the day before. He would start once again by repeating his former 
absurdities, as if nothing had happened. If you became indignant and 
reminded him of yesterday’s defeat, he feigned astonishment, and couldn’t 
remember a thing—except that on the day before, he was proven correct. 

Sometimes I was simply dumbfounded. 

I don’t know what amazed me more: the agility of their speech or their 
art of lying. 

I gradually came to hate them. 

Yet all this had its good side. The more I came to know the individual 
leaders of Social Democracy, or at least the propagandists, the more my 
love for my own people grew. Considering the diabolical craftiness of these 
seducers, who could blame their unfortunate victims? How hard it was, 
even for me, to get the best of this race of dialectical liars! How futile it 
was to try to win over such people with argument, seeing how their mouths 
distorted the truth—disowning the very words they had just used, and then, 
a moment later, taking credit for them! 

No. The more I came to know the Jew, the easier it was to excuse the 
workers. 

In my opinion, the greatest guilt lay not with the workers but rather 
with those who didn’t find it worthwhile to sympathize with their own 
people. They should have given the hard-working son of the national family 
what he was owed, and at the same time placed his seducer and corrupter 
up against the wall. 


2.26 STUDY OF THE FOUNDATIONS OF MARXISM 


Urged by my own daily experiences, I now began to investigate more 
thoroughly the sources of Marxist doctrine. Its effects were well-known to 
me in detail. As a result of careful observation, its daily progress became 


96 


CHAPTER 2 


obvious. And one needed only a little imagination in order to be able to 
predict the consequences that must result. The only question now was: Did 
the founders foresee the effects of their work in the form that they appeared, 
or were they themselves the victims of an error? 

To my mind, both alternatives were possible. 

If the latter case, it was the duty of every thinking person to oppose 
this sinister movement, hoping to avoid the worst results. But if the former 
were true, then it must be admitted that the original authors of this plague 
of nations must have been devils incarnate. For only in the brain of a 
monster, and not that of a man, could such a plan take shape—one whose 
workings must finally bring about the collapse of human civilization and 
the devastation of the world. 

Such being the case, the only alternative left was to fight. This fight 
must employ all the weapons that the human spirit, intellect, and will can 
muster—leaving it to fate to decide who shall prevail. 

And so I began to make myself familiar with the authors of this 
doctrine, in order to study the principles of the movement. The fact that I 
attained my objective faster than anticipated was due to the deeper insight 
that I had acquired into the Jewish question—my prior knowledge having 
been rather superficial. This newly acquired knowledge, by itself, enabled 
me to make a practical comparison between the real content and the 
theoretical pretentiousness of the doctrine laid down by the apostolic 
founders of Social Democracy; I now understood the language of the 
Jewish people. I realized that they use language for the purpose of 
disguising or veiling their thought, so that their real aim cannot be 
discovered by what they say, but rather only by reading between the lines. 

This insight was, for me, the greatest inner revolution that I had yet 
experienced. 

From being a soft-hearted cosmopolitan, I became an outright anti- 
Semite. 


2.27 MARXISM AS DESTROYER OF CULTURE 


Only on one further occasion—and that for the last time—did 
oppressing thoughts arise that caused me some moments of profound 
anguish. 

As I critically reviewed the historical activities of the Jewish people, 
I became anxious. I asked myself if, for some inscrutable reasons beyond 


97 


MEIN KAMPF 


mortal comprehension, destiny might not have irrevocably decreed that 
final victory must go to this little nation? 

Is it possible that this people, which has lived only for the earth, was 
promised the earth as compensation? 

Do we have an objective right to struggle for our own self-preservation, 
or is it merely a subjective thing? 

Fate answered the question for me, insofar as it led me to make a 
detached and exhaustive inquiry into Marxist doctrine, and into the 
activities of the Jewish people in connection with it. 

The Jewish doctrine of Marxism rejects the aristocratic principle of 
nature, substituting for it the eternal privilege of force and energy, 
numerical mass and dead weight. Thus it denies the individual value of the 
human personality, and impugns the idea that nationhood and race have 
primary significance. In doing so, it takes away the very foundations of 
human existence and culture. 

If this doctrine were ever accepted as the foundation of the universe, it 
would lead to the disappearance of all conceivable order. Adopting such a 
law would provoke chaos in the structure of the greatest organism that we 
know—and the inhabitants of this earth would vanish. 

If the Jew, with the aid of his Marxist creed, were to triumph over the 
people of this world, his crown will be the funeral wreath of mankind. And 
this planet will once again follow its orbit through the ether devoid of 
humanity, just as it did millions of years ago. 

Eternal Nature inevitably avenges those who violate her commands. 

Hence today I believe that I am acting in accordance with the will of 
the Almighty Creator: In defending myself against the Jew, I am fighting 
for the work of the Lord. 


98 


CHAPTER 3: 
GENERAL POLITICAL 
REFLECTIONS FROM MY 
TIME IN VIENNA 


Today I am convinced that, in general, a man should not publicly take 
part in politics before the age of 30—except for cases of extraordinary 
talent. Until then, a man’s mental development will mostly consist in 
acquiring the necessary knowledge to serve as the groundwork of a general 
platform, one from which he can evaluate different political problems. One 
must first acquire a fund of general ideas—a worldview. Then he will have 
that mental equipment necessary for consistency and steadfastness in the 
formation of his political opinions. He will then be qualified to take part in 
politics. 

Otherwise he will run a twofold risk. He may find that his original 
position was wrong, at least regarding some essential questions. He will 
then either have to abandon his former position, or else stick with it— 
against his better judgment, and after reason has shown it untenable. In the 
former case, he will find himself in a difficult personal situation. He will 
appear inconsistent, and will lose the right to expect his followers to remain 
loyal. The followers themselves may see him as lacking in judgment, 
causing them to feel uncomfortable and nervous. 

In the second case—which happens frequently—the leader no longer 
has the power of personal persuasion. Hence the defense of his cause 
becomes hollow and superficial. He now becomes vulgar. He no longer 
fights seriously for his political ideas (no man will die in defense of 
something that he does not believe), and he makes increasing demands on 
his followers. Indeed, the greater his own insincerity, the more unfortunate 


99 


MEIN KAMPF 


and inconsiderate become his claims on his followers. Finally, he abandons 
the last vestiges of true leadership and becomes ‘a politician.’ At this point, 
his only consistency is his inconsistency—combined with overbearing 
insolence and an artful lying, all developed to a shameful degree. 

If, to the misfortune of all decent people, such a person succeeds in 
becoming a parliamentarian, it will be clear at the outset that, for him, the 
essence of political activity consists in a heroic struggle to keep a 
permanent hold on this milk-bottle for himself and his family. The more 
his wife and children are dependent on him, the more stubbornly he will 
fight to stay in office. For that reason, anyone else who shows signs of 
political competence is his personal enemy. In every new movement, he 
will sense the possible beginning of his own end. And anyone who is a 
better man than himself will appear to him as a danger. 

I shall have more to say later about this kind of parliamentary vermin. 


3.1 THE POLITICIAN 


At the age of 30, a man obviously still has a great deal to learn. But 
henceforth, what he learns will principally be an amplification of his basic 
ideas; it will support his basic worldview. What he learns will not imply 
the abandonment of his principles, but rather a deeper knowledge of them. 
And thus his supporters will never have the uncomfortable feeling that they 
have been misled by him. On the contrary: their confidence will grow when 
they see that their leader’s qualities are progressing and developing 
organically by the assimilation of new ideas. His followers will see this 
process as an enrichment of his doctrine, one that reinforces the correctness 
of the view. 

A leader who must abandon the platform founded on his general 
worldview, because he recognizes it as false, can only act honorably when 
he declares his readiness to accept the final consequences of his erroneous 
views. In such a case, he should refrain from any further political activity. 
Having once gone astray on essential matters, he may possibly go astray a 
second time. In any case, he has no right whatsoever to expect or demand 
that his fellow citizens continue to support him. 

How little such a line of conduct commends itself to our public leaders 
nowadays is proved by the general corruption prevalent among the present 
cabal, which feels itself ‘called’ to political leadership. 

Overall, there is scarcely one who is prepared for this task. 


100 


CHAPTER 3 


Even though, in those days, I used to give more time than most others 
to the consideration of political questions, I still carefully refrained from 
taking an open part in politics. I spoke of those things that bothered me, 
but only to a small circle of friends. This habit had many advantages. Rather 
than talk at them, I learned to listen—to get the feel of others’ way of 
thinking. Often their outlook and views were quite primitive. But I trained 
myself well, without losing the time and opportunity for education. 

Nowhere in Germany was the opportunity for making such a study so 
favorable as in Vienna. 

In the old Danubian Monarchy, political thought had a wider range and 
richer variety of interests than in old Germany of the same era—excepting 
certain parts of Prussia, Hamburg, and the districts bordering on the North 
Sea. When I say ‘Austria,’ I mean that part of the great Habsburg Empire 
that supplied, through its German population, not only the historic basis 
for the formation of this state, but also whose population was, for several 
centuries, also the exclusive source of cultural life in that artificial political 
system. As time went on, the stability of the Austrian State and the 
guarantee of its continued existence depended more and more on the 
maintenance of this germ-cell of the empire. 


3.2 VIENNA’S LAST REVIVAL 


The hereditary territories were the heart of the empire. And it was this 
heart that constantly sent the life-blood pulsating through the whole 
political and cultural system. If this was the heart, Vienna was the brain 
and the will. 

At that time, Vienna appeared like an enthroned queen, whose 
authoritative sway united the conglomeration of heterogenous nationalities. 
The radiant beauty of the capital city made one forget the sad symptoms 
of senile decay that were manifested in the state as a whole. 

Though the empire was quivering internally because of the conflicts 
among the various nationalities, the outside world—and Germany in 
particular—saw only that lovely picture of the city. The illusion was all the 
greater because, at that time, Vienna seemed to have experienced its 
greatest revival. Under a truly gifted mayor, one who had the stamp of 
administrative genius, the venerable Residence of the Emperors seemed to 
have recaptured the glory of its youth. The last great German who sprang 
from the ranks of the people that had colonized the Ostmark was not a 


101 


MEIN KAMPF 


so-called statesman. This Dr. Lueger, in his role as mayor of the Imperial 
Capital Vienna, achieved so much in almost all spheres of municipal 
activity—both economic and cultural—that the heart of the empire 
throbbed with renewed energy. He thus proved himself a much greater 
statesman than the so-called ‘diplomats’ of that period. 


3.3 GERMANDOM IN AUSTRIA 


The fact that this political system of heterogeneous nations called 
‘Austria’ finally broke down is no sign of political incapacity on the part of 
the Germans in the old Ostmark. The collapse was the inevitable result of an 
impossible situation. Ten million people cannot permanently hold together a 
state of 50 million, one composed of different and conflicting nationalities— 
unless certain definite prerequisite conditions are established in time. 

The German-Austrian had very big ways of thinking. 

Accustomed to living in a great empire, he had a strong sense of 
obligation. He was the only member of the Austrian State who looked 
beyond the narrow borders of his own people and took in the full sweep of 
the empire. When destiny severed him from his common Fatherland, he 
tried to manage the tremendous task at hand. This task was to maintain for 
the German-Austrians that which, through innumerable struggles, their 
ancestors had originally won from the East. And it must be remembered 
that they couldn’t put their undivided strength into this effort, because their 
hearts and minds were always turning back towards their kinsfolk in the 
Motherland—leaving only a small part for the homeland. 

The general horizon of the German-Austrian was comparatively broad. 
His commercial interests comprised almost every part of the heterogeneous 
empire. The conduct of nearly all major business activity was in his hands. 
For the most part, he provided the state with its leading technical experts 
and civil servants. He was responsible for conducting foreign trade, to the 
extent that that sphere of activity was not under Jewish control. He held 
the state together. His military duties carried him far beyond the narrow 
borders of his homeland. Though the recruit might join a German regiment, 
the regiment itself might be stationed in Herzegovina, Vienna, or Galicia. 
The officers in the Habsburg armies were still Germans, and so were the 
better parts of the civil service. 

Furthermore, art and science were in German hands. Apart from the 
new artistic trash—which might just as well have been produced by a 


102 


CHAPTER 3 


nation of Negroes—all genuine artistic inspiration came from the Germans. 
In music, architecture, sculpture, and painting, Vienna abundantly supplied 
the entire Dual Monarchy. And this source never seemed to show signs of 
exhaustion. 

Finally, it was the German element that determined the conduct of 
foreign policy—though a small number of Hungarians were also active in 
that field. 

All efforts, however, to save the unity of the state were doomed to end 
in failure, because the essential prerequisites were missing. 


3.4 CENTRIFUGAL FORCES OF THE AUSTRIAN PEOPLE 


There was only one possible way to control and hold in check the 
centrifugal forces of the differing nationalities. This was to centrally govern 
the Austrian State and organize it internally on this basis. In no other way 
could the existence of that state be assured. 

Now and then there were lucid moments in the ruling authorities when 
this truth was recognized. But it was quickly forgotten or ignored, because 
of the practical difficulties. Every step toward federalism was bound to fail 
because, without a strong central authority, there was insufficient power to 
hold the federal elements together. 

It must be remembered that the conditions in Austria were quite 
different from Bismarck’s Germany. That was faced with only one 
difficulty, namely, overcoming political conditions; the whole Reich 
already had a common cultural basis. Apart from a few minor fragments, 
it comprised only a single people. 

Conditions in Austria were quite the opposite. 

Apart from Hungary, there was no great political tradition in any of the 
various nations. If there were, time either erased all traces, or at least 
rendered them obscure. Moreover, this was the age of ascendant 
nationalism—the awakening of national instincts in the various countries 
of the empire. They were difficult to control because, just outside the 
borders of the empire, new national states were forming, consisting of the 
same racial stock as those within it. These new states were able to exercise 
a greater influence than the German element. 

Even Vienna couldn’t hold out forever in this conflict. 

When Budapest developed into a metropolis, a rival appeared—one 
who’s mission was to strengthen one part of the empire, and not to help 


103 


MEIN KAMPF 


hold it together. Soon Prague followed the example of Budapest; and later 
on came Lemberg, Laibach, and others. As these former provincial towns 
rose to become national cities, they became the centers of an independent 
cultural life. Through this, local national instincts acquired a spiritual 
foundation and thereby gained a deeper hold on the people. The time was 
bound to come when the particular interests of those various nations would 
become stronger than their common imperial interests. Once that stage was 
reached, Austria’s doom was sealed. 

The course of this development was clearly perceptible since the death 
of Joseph II.! Its rapidity depended on a number of factors, some of which 
had their source in the Monarchy itself. Others resulted from the position 
that the empire took in foreign policy. 

Only a firm and persistent policy of centralization could hope to be 
successful at enforcing a permanent consolidation of the Austrian State. 
Before all, the principle should have been adopted that only one common 
language could be used as the official language of the state. In this way it 
would be possible to emphasize the formal unity of the imperial 
commonwealth. And thus the administration would have in its hands a 
technical instrument to ensure the persistence of the state as a political 
unity. In the same way, schools and other forms of education should have 
been used to inculcate a feeling of common citizenship. Such an objective 
could not be reached in 10 or 20 years; the effort would take centuries. Just 
as in all problems of colonization, steady perseverance is a far more 
important element than a momentary output of energetic effort. 

It goes without saying that, in such circumstances, the country must be 
governed by strictly adhering to the principle of uniformity. 


3.55 CONSEQUENCES OF ETHNIC DIVERSITY 


For me it was quite instructive to discover why this did not occur—or 
rather, why it was not done. Those who were guilty of the omission must 
be held responsible for the break-up of the Habsburg Empire. 

More than any other state, the existence of the old Austria depended 
on a strong and capable government. It lacked ethnic uniformity; this 
constitutes the fundamental basis of a national state, and will preserve its 


' Joseph II was emperor of the Holy Roman Empire from 1765 to his death in 
1790. 


104 


CHAPTER 3 


existence even should the ruling power be grossly inefficient. When a state 
is composed of a homogeneous population, the natural inertia of such a 
population will hold it together and maintain its existence through 
astonishingly long periods of misgovernment and poor administration. It 
may often seem as if there were no life in such a body-politic. But a time 
comes when the supposed corpse rises up and displays to the world an 
astonishing manifestation of its indestructible vitality. 

But the situation is utterly different in a country where the population 
is not homogeneous, where there is no bond of common blood, but only a 
ruling hand. Should that hand show signs of weakness, the result will not 
be a kind of hibernation of the state, but rather an awakening of the 
individual instincts that are slumbering in the various ethnicities. These 
instincts are dormant when the state has a strong central government. The 
danger that exists in these slumbering instincts can be attenuated only by 
centuries of common education, traditions, and interests. 

The younger such states are, the more their existence will depend on 
the ability and strength of the central government. If they survive only due 
to the power of a strong individual leader, they often collapse as soon as 
he dies. But even after centuries of effort, these separatist instincts cannot 
always be completely overcome. They may suddenly awaken when the 
central government shows weakness, or when centralizing efforts prove 
unable to counteract the vital energies of the separate nationalities, as they 
forge ahead towards shaping their own individual existence. 

The failure to see the truth of all this constituted perhaps the tragic guilt 
of the House of Habsburg. 


3.6 JOSEPH II 


For only one Habsburg ruler did Destiny hold aloft the torch over the 
future of his country. But the torch was then extinguished forever. 

Joseph II, Roman Kaiser of the German nation, was filled with growing 
anxiety when he realized that his House was moved to an outlying corner 
of the Reich, and that before long it would be overtumed and engulfed in 
the whirlpool of Babylonian nationalities—unless something was done at 
the eleventh hour to overcome the dire consequences of longstanding 
negligence. With superhuman energy, this ‘Friend of Humanity’ made every 
possible effort to counteract the carelessness of his predecessors. Within one 
decade he strove to repair centuries of damage. If Destiny had granted him 


105 


MEIN KAMPF 


40 years for his labors, and if but two generations had carried on his work, 
the miracle might have been performed. But when he died, broken in body 
and spirit after ten years ofrulership, his work sank with him into the grave. 
They now rest forever in that Capuchin crypt, never to awake. 

His successors had neither the ability nor the will-power necessary for 
the task they faced. 

When the first signs of a new revolutionary epoch appeared in Europe, 
they gradually scattered the fire throughout Austria. And when the fire 
began to steadily burn, it was fanned, not by the social or political 
conditions, but by forces that had their origin in the nationalist yearnings 
of the various ethnic groups. 

The European revolutions of 1848 primarily took the form of a class 
conflict in almost every other country, but in Austria it took the form of a 
new racial struggle. Insofar as the German-Austrians there forgot the 
origins of the movement—or perhaps had failed to recognize them at the 
start and consequently took part in the revolutionary uprising—they sealed 
their own fate. They helped to awaken the spirit of Western democracy that, 
within a short while, shattered the foundations of their own existence. 


3.7 THE DISSOLUTION OF THE HABSBURG MONARCHY 


Setting up a representative parliamentary body, without first insisting 
that only one language be used in all public discourse, was the first great 
blow to the German element in the Dual Monarchy. From that moment on, 
the state itself was lost. All that followed was nothing but the historic 
liquidation of an empire. 

To watch that process of progressive disintegration was a tragic but 
also instructive experience. The execution of history’s decree was carried 
out in thousands of details. The fact that great numbers of people wandered 
around blindly, even as they were surrounded by signs of decay, only 
proves that the gods had decreed Austria’s destruction. 

I don’t want to dwell on details here, because that would lie outside 
the scope of this book. I want to treat in detail only those events that are 
typical among the causes that lead to the decline of nations and states, and 
which are therefore of importance to our present age. Moreover, the study 
of these events helped to furnish the basis of my own political outlook. 


106 


CHAPTER 3 


3.8 PARLIAMENTARIANISM 


Among the institutions that most clearly showed unmistakable signs 
of decay, even to the weak-sighted Philistine, was that which, of all the 
institutions of state, should have been the most firmly founded—I mean 
the Parliament, or Reichsrat as it was called in Austria. 

The pattern for this corporate body was obviously that which existed 
in England, the land of classic ‘democracy.’ The whole of that blissful 
organization was bodily transferred, unchanged, to Vienna. 

An Austrian counterpart to the British two-chamber system was 
established: a Chamber of Deputies and a House of Lords. The ‘houses’ 
themselves, considered as buildings, were somewhat different. When Barry 
built his palaces on the shore of the Thames, he could look to the history 
of the British Empire for his inspiration. In that history he found sufficient 
material to fill and decorate the 1,200 niches, brackets, and pillars of his 
magnificent edifice. The House of Lords and the House of Commons 
became temples dedicated to the glory of the nation. 

This was when the first difficulty came for Vienna. When Hansen, the 
Danish architect,? completed the last gable of the marble palace, he turned 
to the ancient classical world for subjects to fill out his decorative plan. 
This theatrical shrine of ‘western democracy’ was adorned with the statues 
and portraits of Greek and Roman statesmen and philosophers. As if in 
symbolic irony, the horses of the guadriga atop the two Houses are pulling 
apart in all four directions. There could be no better symbol for the kind of 
activity going on within the walls of that very building. 

The ‘nationalities’ were opposed to any kind of glorification of Austrian 
history in the decoration of this building; they insisted that it would 
constitute an offence to them. Much the same happened in Germany, where 
Wallot’s Reichstag building was dedicated to the Germans only under the 
thunder of cannons in the World War—and then only in an inscription. 

I was not yet 20 when I first entered the Palace on the Franzensring to 
watch and listen in the Chamber of Deputies. That first experience aroused 
in me a profound feeling of repugnance. 

I always hated the Parliament, but not as an institution in itself. On the 
contrary, as one who cherished ideals of political freedom, I couldn’t even 


2 Charles Barry (1795-1860) designed and rebuilt the Houses of Parliament in 
the mid-1800s. 


3 Theophil Hansen (1813-1891). 


107 


MEIN KAMPF 


imagine any other form of government. In light of my attitude towards the 
House of Habsburg, I would then have thought it a crime against liberty 
and reason to consider any kind of dictatorship as a possible form of 
government. 

I had a certain admiration for the British Parliament, and this 
contributed to the formation of my opinion. This feeling came almost 
unconsciously, much of it while reading the newspapers when I was young. 
I couldn’t discard that admiration in an instant. The dignified way in which 
the British House of Commons fulfilled its function impressed me greatly, 
thanks largely to the glowing terms used by the Austrian press. Could there 
could be any nobler form of government than self-government by the 
people? 

But these considerations furnished the very basis of my hostility to the 
Austrian Parliament. The way it was represented here seemed unworthy of 
its great example. The following thoughts also influenced my attitude: 

The fate of the Germans in the Austrian State depended on their 
position in the Reichsrat. Prior to the introduction of universal suffrage by 
secret ballot, the Germans had a majority in the Reichsrat—though not a 
very substantial one. This was a cause for concern because the Social- 
Democratic faction of the German majority was unreliable regarding 
national questions. In matters of critical concern to the Germans, the Social- 
Democrats always took an anti-German stand because they were afraid of 
losing support among the other national groups. Even before universal 
suffrage, the Social-Democratic Party could no longer be considered a 
German Party. Universal suffrage put an end even to the purely numerical 
dominance of the German element. The way was now clear for the further 
de-Germanization of the state. 

My nationalist instinct of self-preservation made it impossible for me 
to welcome a system in which the German element was not really 
represented as such, but always betrayed by the Social-Democratic faction. 
Yet all these defects, and many others, could not be attributed to the 
parliamentary system as such, but rather to the Austrian State in particular. 
I still believed that if the German majority could be restored in the 
representative body, there would be no occasion to oppose such a system— 
as long as the old Austrian State continued to exist. 

Such was my general attitude at the time when I first entered those 
sacred and contentious halls. For me, they were sacred only because of the 
radiant beauty of that majestic building. A Greek wonder on German soil. 

But I soon became enraged by the hideous spectacle that met my eyes! 


108 


CHAPTER 3 


Several hundred representatives were there to discuss a problem of 
great economic importance, and each one had the right to have his say. 

That experience of a single day was enough to supply me with food 
for thought during several weeks afterwards. 

The intellectual level of the debate was quite low. Sometimes the 
debaters didn’t make themselves intelligible at all. Several of those present 
didn’t speak German, but only their Slav vernaculars or dialects. Thus I 
had the opportunity of hearing with my own ears what I had previously 
known only by reading the newspapers. A turbulent mass of people, all 
gesticulating and screaming at one another, with a pathetic old man shaking 
his bell and making frantic efforts to call the House to order by friendly 
appeals, exhortations, and grave warnings.‘ 

I had to laugh. 

I paid a second visit several weeks later. It was an entirely different 
picture—almost unrecognizable. The hall was nearly empty. They were 
sleeping in the other rooms below. Only a few deputies were in their places, 
yawning in each other’s faces. One was ‘speaking.’ A deputy speaker was 
in the chair. He looked around with obvious boredom. 

Then I began to reflect seriously on the whole thing. I went to the 
Parliament whenever I had any time to spare, and silently but attentively 
watched the spectacle. I listened to the debates, as far as they could be 
understood. And I studied the more or less intelligent features of those 
elected representatives of the various nationalities that composed that 
motley state. Gradually I formed my own ideas about what I saw. 

A year of such quiet observation was sufficient to transform or 
completely eliminate my former convictions regarding the character of this 
institution. I no longer opposed merely the perverted form that the principle 
of parliamentary representation had assumed in Austria; no. It became 
impossible for me to accept the system in itself. Up to that time, I had 
believed that the disastrous deficiencies of the Austrian Parliament were 
due to the lack of a German majority. But now I recognized that the very 
essence and form of the institution itself was wrong. 

A number of questions arose in my mind. 


4 Interestingly, Mark Twain made a similar observation just a decade before. In 
the non-fiction essay “Stirring times in Austria” (1898), he lampoons the chaotic 
and sorry state of the Austrian parliament. Notably, he remarks on how all sides 
found the Jews to blame for their problems: “In all cases the Jew had to roast, 
no matter which side he was on” (p. 540). A follow-up essay, “Concerning the 
Jews” (1899), is also relevant for the discussion at hand. 


109 


MEIN KAMPF 


I studied the democratic principle of majority rule more closely. And I 
scrutinized no less carefully the intellectual and moral worth of the 
gentlemen who, as the chosen representatives of the nation, were entrusted 
with the task of making this institution function. 

Thus I came to know both the institution itself and those in it. 

And thus I formed a clear and vivid picture of a typical example of that 
most dignified phenomenon of our time: the parliamentarian. The picture 
of him that I then formed became deeply engraved on my mind, and I have 
never altered its essential character. 

Once again, these object-lessons taken from real life saved me from 
getting firmly entangled by a theory that, at first glance, seems so alluring to 
many people—though that theory itself is a symptom of human decadence. 

Western democracy, as practised today, is the forerunner of Marxism. 
In fact, the latter would be inconceivable without the former. Democracy 
is the breeding ground in which the bacilli of the Marxist world-pest can 
grow and spread. By the introduction of parliamentarianism, democracy 
produced an ‘abomination of filth and fire’*—the creative fire of which, 
however, seems to have died out. 

I’m very grateful to Fate that I noticed this problem when I was still in 
Vienna; if I had been in Germany at that time, I might easily have found 
only a superficial solution. If I had been in Berlin when I first discovered 
what an illogical institution ‘parliament’ is, I might easily have gone to the 
other extreme. I might have believed—as many did, and not without 
apparently good reason—that the salvation of the people and the empire 
could be secured only by restrengthening imperial authority. Those who 
believed didn’t understand the tendencies of their time, and were blind to 
the aspirations of the people. 

In Austria, this was impossible. 

Here it wasn’t so easy to fall from one error into another. If the 
Parliament was worthless, the Habsburgs were worse—or at least no better. 
The problem wasn’t solved by rejecting the parliamentary system. A 
question immediately arose: What then? To repudiate and abolish the 
Vienna Parliament would have resulted in leaving all power in the hands 
of the Habsburgs. For me especially, that idea was unthinkable. 

Since this problem was particularly difficult in regard to Austria, I was 
forced, while still quite young, to go more thoroughly into the essentials 
of the whole question than I would otherwise have done. 


5 A reference to Goethe’s Faust (part 1, line 5356). 


110 


CHAPTER 3 


3.9 LACK OF RESPONSIBILITY 


The aspect of the situation that was most thought-provoking to me was 
the manifest lack of any individual responsibility. 

The parliament takes an action that may have the most devastating 
consequences, and yet nobody bears responsibility for it. No one can be 
called to account. Can we call the government responsible if, in the face of 
a catastrophe, it simply resigns? Or if the coalition is changed, or even if 
parliament is dissolved? 

Can a fluctuating majority of people ever be truly responsible for anything? 

Isn’t the idea of responsibility bound to an individual person? 

Is it even possible to actually hold the parliamentary leaders 
accountable for any action that originated in the desires of the mass of 
representatives, and was carried out under their direction? 

Instead of developing constructive ideas and plans, does the true 
statesman’s business really consist in the art of making a whole pack of 
blockheads understand his projects? Is it really his job to beg and plead so 
that they will grant him their generous consent? 

Is it really an indispensable quality in a statesman that he should 
possess a gift of persuasion commensurate with his ability to conceive great 
political measures, and to carry them through into practice? 

Does it really prove that a statesman is incompetent if he should fail to 
win over a majority of votes in an assembly that has been called together 
as the chance result of an electoral system? 

Has there ever been a case where such an assembly has worthily 
appraised a great political concept before that concept was proven a 
success? 

In this world, isn’t the creative act of genius always a protest against 
the inertia of the mass? And what should the statesman do if he doesn’t 
succeed in coaxing the parliamentary mob to give its consent? 

Should he buy it? 

Or, when confronted with the obstinate stupidity of his fellow citizens, 
should he then refrain from pushing forward the vital necessities? Should 
he resign or remain in power? 

In such a case, doesn’t a man of character find himself face to face with 
an insoluble contradiction between knowledge and moral integrity—or 
better, his sense of honesty? 


111 


MEIN KAMPF 


3.10 THE DESTRUCTION OF THE IDEA OF LEADERSHIP 


Where can we draw the line between public duty and personal honor? 

Shouldn’t every genuine leader renounce the idea of degrading himself 
to the level of a political gangster? 

And, on the other hand, doesn’t every gangster feel the itch to ‘play 
politics,’ seeing that the final responsibility will never rest with him 
personally but rather with an anonymous, unaccountable mob? 

Doesn’t our parliamentary principle of majority rule necessarily lead 
to the destruction of the idea of leadership? 

Does anyone honestly believe that human progress originates in the 
brain of the majority, and not in the brain of the individual personality? 

Or may it be presumed that future human civilization can dispense with 
this as a condition of its existence? 

Or rather, doesn’t this seem today to be more indispensible than ever? 

The parliamentary principle of majority rule rejects the authority of the 
individual and puts a numerical quota of anonymous heads in its place. In 
doing so, it contradicts the aristocratic principle, which is a fundamental 
law of nature—though it must be admitted that this principle is not reflected 
in the decadence of our upper 10,000.° 

The devastating influence of this parliamentary institution might not 
easily be recognized by those who read the Jewish press, unless the reader 
has learned how to think independently and examine facts for himself. This 
institution is primarily responsible for the crowded inrush of mediocre 
people into the field of politics. Confronted with such a phenomenon, a 
man who is endowed with real qualities of leadership will be tempted to 
refrain from taking part in politics; under these circumstances, the situation 
doesn’t call for a man who has a capacity for constructive statesmanship 
but rather for a man who is capable of bargaining for the favor of the 
majority. The situation appeals to small minds, and it attracts them 
accordingly. 

The narrower the spirit and knowledge of our leather-handlers, the 
more accurately can they assess their own situation. They will therefore be 
all the more inclined to praise a system that doesn’t demand creative genius 
or even high-class talent, but rather the craftiness of an efficient town clerk. 
Indeed, they value this kind of petty craftiness more than the political 


6 In other words, of the “1%”. 


112 


CHAPTER 3 


genius of a Pericles.’ Such mediocrity never worries about responsibility. 
From the beginning, our parliamentarian knows that, whatever be the 
results of his ‘statesmanship,’ his end is already written in the stars; one 
day, he will have to clear out and make room for another equally great 
spirit. 

It’s a sign of our decadent times that the number of eminent statesmen 
grows as the caliber of individual personality dwindles. That caliber will 
inevitably shrink as the individual politician increasingly depends upon 
parliamentary majorities. A man of real political ability will refuse to be 
the lackey of idiotic incompetents and big-mouths. And they in tum, being 
the representatives of the majority—and hence of stupidity—hate nothing 
so much as a superior mind. 

For such an assembly of wise men, it’s always a consolation to be led 
by a person whose intellectual stature is on par with their own. Thus each 
one may have the occasional opportunity to shine in debate; and above all, 
each one feels that he too may rise to the top. If Peter be boss today, then 
why not Paul tomorrow? 


3.11 THE EXCLUSION OF THE INDIVIDUAL LEADER 


This invention of democracy is very closely connected with a peculiar 
phenomenon that has recently become a real disgrace—namely, the 
cowardice of a large section of our so-called political leaders. Whenever 
important decisions must be made, they always find themselves fortunate 
in being able to hide behind the so-called majority! 

In observing one of these political manipulators, one notices how he 
begs the majority for their approval for whatever action he takes. He needs 
to have accomplices, in order to shift responsibility to other shoulders 
whenever it is convenient to do so. That’s the main reason why this kind 
of political activity is abhorrent to men of character and courage. At the 
same time, it attracts inferior types; for a person who is not willing to accept 
responsibility for his own actions, but is always seeking to hide, is a 
cowardly scoundrel. Whenever a national leader comes from that low class 
of politicians, evil consequences will soon follow. No one will then have 
the courage to take a decisive step. They will submit to abuse and 
defamation rather than rise up and take a stand. And thus nobody is left 


7 Pericles (ca. 495 — 429 BC) was one of the great Athenian statesmen. 


113 


MEIN KAMPF 


who is willing to risk his position and his career, if necessary, in support of 
a determined line of policy. 

One truth must always be kept in mind: the majority can never replace 
the man. The majority represents not only ignorance but also cowardice. 
And just as a hundred blockheads don’t equal one wise man, so a hundred 
cowards are incapable of any heroic action. 

The lighter the burden of responsibility on each individual leader, the 
greater will be the number of those who, in spite of their sorry mediocrity, 
will come to place their immortal energies at the service of the nation. They 
are So anxious that they find it hard to wait their tum. They stand in a long 
line, painfully and sadly counting the number of those ahead of them, and 
calculating the hours until their tum comes. They watch every change in 
personnel, and they are grateful for every scandal that thins the ranks ahead 
of them. 

And if someone sticks to his stool too long, they consider this as almost 
a breach of a holy pact of solidarity. They grow vindictive, and don’t rest 
until that inconsiderate person is finally driven out and forced to hand over 
his cosy berth back to the public. After that, he will have little chance of 
getting another opportunity. Usually those creatures who have been forced 
to give up their posts try to get in line again, unless they are hounded away 
by the protests of the others. 

The result of all this is that, in such a state, the succession of sudden 
changes in public offices has a very troubling effect in general, one that may 
easily lead to disaster. It’s not only the ignorant and the incompetent person 
who may fall victim to those parliamentary conditions; the genuine leader 
may be affected just as much as the others, if not more so, whenever Fate 
has placed a capable man in a leadership position. If the superior quality of 
such a leader becomes recognized, it will result in a united front against 
him—-particularly if that leader, though not coming from their ranks, should 
fall into the habit of intermingling with this exalted society. They want to 
have only their own types as company, and they will quickly take a hostile 
attitude towards any man who might show himself superior to them. Their 
instinct, which is so blind in other ways, is very sharp in this respect. 

The inevitable result is that the intellectual level of the ruling class 
steadily declines. One can easily predict how much the nation and state are 
bound to suffer from such a condition—provided one doesn’t belong to 
that same class of ‘leaders.’ 

The parliamentary régime in the old Austria was the purest form of this 
institution. 


114 


CHAPTER 3 


Though the Austrian prime minister was appointed by the emperor and 
king, this act of appointment merely gave practical effect to the parliamentary 
will. The huckstering and bargaining that went on in regard to every 
ministerial position showed all the typical marks of western democracy. The 
results that followed were in keeping with the principles applied. The 
intervals between the replacement of one person by another gradually became 
shorter, finally ending up in a veritable chase. With each change, the quality 
of the ‘statesman’ in question deteriorated, until finally only the petty type 
of political gangster remained. In such people, the qualities of statesmanship 
were measured and valued according to the skill with which they pieced 
together one coalition after another; in other words, their craftiness in 
manipulating the pettiest political transactions, which is the only kind of 
practical activity suited to the aptitudes of these representatives. 

In this sphere, Vienna was the school that offered the most impressive 
examples. 

Another feature that engaged my attention even more was the contrast 
between the talents and knowledge of these representatives of the people 
on the one hand and, on the other, the nature of the tasks they had to face. 
Willingly or unwillingly, one couldn’t help thinking seriously of the narrow 
intellectual outlook of these chosen representatives of the various 
nationalities. And one couldn’t avoid contemplating the methods through 
which these noble figures in our public life were first discovered. 

It was worthwhile to make a thorough study of the way in which the 
real talents of these gentlemen were devoted to the service of their 
country—in other words, to thoroughly analyze the technical process of 
their activities. 

The more I penetrated into the intimate structure of parliamentary life, 
and the more I studied the persons and principles of the system in a spirit 
of ruthless objectivity, the more deplorable it became. Indeed, it’s 
mandatory to be strictly objective in the study of an institution whose 
sponsors speak of ‘objectivity’ as the only fair basis of examination and 
judgment. If one studied these gentlemen and the laws of their sordid 
existence, the results were surprising. 


3.12 ‘PUBLIC OPINION’ 


Objectively considered, there is no other principle that tums out to be 
quite so ill-conceived as parliamentarianism. 


115 


MEIN KAMPF 


Here we may pass over the methods according to which the election 
of the representatives takes place, as well as the ways that bring them into 
office and bestow new titles on them. It is quite evident that public wishes 
are satisfied only to a small degree, by the manner in which an election 
takes place. Everyone who properly estimates the political intelligence of 
the masses can easily see that it is insufficient to independently form a 
general political outlook, or to select the men who might be competent to 
carry out their ideas. 

Whatever definition we may give of the term ‘public opinion,’ only a 
very small part of it originates from personal experience or individual 
insight. The greater portion results from the manner in which public matters 
have been presented to the people, through an overwhelmingly impressive 
and persistent system of ‘information.’ 

In the theologial sphere, religious yearnings slumber in the soul, and 
the profession of a denominational belief is largely the result of education. 
So too, the political opinions of the masses are the final result of influences 
systematically operating on the human soul and intelligence, in light of a 
method that is applied with unbelievable thoroughness and perseverance. 

By far the most effective branch of political education—that which is 
best expressed by the word ‘propaganda’—is conducted by the press. The 
press is the chief means employed in the process of political 
‘enlightenment.’ It represents a kind of school for adults. This educational 
activity, however, is not in the hands of the state but in the clutches of 
powers that are of a very inferior character. 

While still a young man in Vienna, I had excellent opportunities for 
coming to know the men who owned this machine for mass instruction, as 
well as those who supplied it with ideas. At first I was quite surprised when 
I realized how little time was necessary for this great evil power within the 
state to produce a certain belief among the public. In doing so, the genuine 
will and convictions of the public were often completely misconstrued. It 
took the press only a few days to transform some ridiculously trivial matter 
into an issue of national importance—while vital problems were completely 
ignored or hidden away from public view. 

The press succeeded in the magical art of producing names from 
nowhere within just a few weeks. They made it appear that the great hopes 
of the masses were bound up with those names. And so they made those 
names more popular than any man of real ability could ever hope for. All 
this was done, despite the fact that such names were utterly unknown, even 
up to a month before the press publicly extolled them. 


116 


CHAPTER 3 


At the same time, older figures in politics and other spheres of life 
quickly faded from the public memory, and were forgotten as if they were 
dead—though they were still vigorous and healthy. Or they were so vilely 
abused that it looked as if their names would soon stand as permanent 
symbols of villainy. To understand the really pernicious influence that the 
press can exercise, one must study this infamous Jewish method whereby 
honorable and decent people are besmirched with filth, in the lowest form 
of abuse and slander, from hundreds of directions simultaneously—as if 
by magic. 

These spiritual robbers will grab at anything that might serve their evil 
ends. 

They would poke their noses into the most intimate family affairs, and 
not rest until they had sniffed out some petty issue that could be used to 
destroy the victim’s reputation. But even if nothing were discovered in the 
private or public life of the victim, they continued to hurl abuse at him in 
the belief that some of their charges would stick, even though refuted a 
thousand times. In most cases, it finally became impossible for the victim 
to continue his defense because the accuser worked together with so many 
accomplices that his slanders were repeated interminably. 

But these slanderers would never admit that they were acting from 
motives that were believable or comprehensible to the common run of 
humanity. God forbid! The scoundrel who defamed his contemporaries in 
this villainous way would, like an octopus, cover himself with a cloud of 
respectability and clever phrases about his ‘journalistic duty’ and other such 
nonsense. When these pests gathered together in large numbers at meetings 
and congresses, they would dish out a lot of slimy talk about a special kind 
of ‘honor’—namely, the professional honor of the journalist. Then the 
assembled species would bow their respects to one another. 

This rabble fabricates more than two-thirds of the so-called public 
opinion, from whose foam the parliamentary Aphrodite eventually arises.® 


3.13 THE MAJORITY PRINCIPLE 


Several volumes would be needed if one were to give an adequate 
account of all its hollow fallacies. But if we pass over the details and look 


8 The name ‘Aphrodite’ means literally ‘foam-risen.’ In Greek mythology, 
Aphrodite arose from the foam of the sea. 


117 


MEIN KAMPF 


at the product itself while in operation, I think this alone will suffice to 
open the eyes of even the most innocent and naive person, so that he may 
recognize the absurdity of this institution by looking at it objectively. 

This human aberration is as harmful as it is absurd. In order to see this, 
the best and easiest method is to compare democratic parliamentarianism 
with a genuine German democracy. 

The remarkable characteristic of the parliamentary form of democracy 
is the fact that a number of persons, let us say 500—these days, including 
women also—are elected to parliament and invested with authority to give 
final judgment on everything. In practice, they alone are the governing body; 
for although they may appoint a cabinet that outwardly seems to direct state 
affairs, this cabinet has no real existence of its own. In reality this so-called 
government can’t do anything against the will of the assembly. It can never 
be called to account for anything, since the right of decision is not vested in 
the cabinet but in the parliamentary majority. The cabinet always functions 
only as the executor of the will of the majority. Its political ability can be 
judged only by how far it succeeds in adapting to the will of the majority, 
or in persuading the majority to agree to its proposals. 

But this means that it must descend from the level of a real governing 
power to that of a beggar, one who has to beg for the approval of a majority. 
Indeed, the main job of the cabinet is to secure for itself the favor of the 
majority then in power or, failing that, to form a new majority that will be 
more favorably disposed. If it should succeed in either of these efforts, it 
may go on ‘governing’ for a little while. If it should fail to win or form a 
majority, it must resign. Whether its policy per se was right or wrong 
doesn’t matter at all. 

For all practical purposes, responsibility is abolished. 

The consequences of such a state of affairs can easily be understood 
from the following simple considerations: 

Those 500 deputies who have been elected by the people come from 
various dissimilar callings in life; they show widely varying degrees of 
political capacity, with the result that the whole picture is incoherent and 
deplorable. Surely nobody believes that these elected representatives of the 
nation are the choice spirits or first-class intellects! No one, I hope, is 
foolish enough to pretend that hundreds of true statesmen can emerge from 
papers placed in the ballot box by voters who are just of average 
intelligence. 

The absurd notion that men of genius are born out of universal suffrage 
cannot be too strongly repudiated. In the first place, those times may be 


118 


CHAPTER 3 


really called blessed when one genuine statesman appears among a people. 
Such statesmen don’t appear by the hundreds or more. Secondly, the broad 
masses instinctively display a definite antipathy towards every outstanding 
genius. There’s a better chance of a camel passing through the eye of a 
needle than of a truly great man being ‘discovered’ through an election. 

Throughout world history, exceptional events have mostly been due to 
the driving force of an individual personality. 

But here, 500 persons of sub-par intellectual qualities pass judgment 
on the most important problems affecting the nation. They form 
governments, that in turn learn to win the approval of the illustrious 
assembly for every legislative step—which means that the policy to be 
carried out is actually the policy of the 500. 

And that’s just what it usually looks like. 

But let’s pass over the intellectual qualities of these representatives and 
ask what is the nature of the task set before them. If we consider the fact 
that the problems to be addressed are variable and diverse, we can very 
well realize how inefficient a governing system must be that entrusts the 
right of decision to a mass assembly, one in which only very few possess 
the requisite knowledge and experience to properly deal with the matters. 
The most important economic measures are submitted to a tribunal in which 
not more than 10 percent have studied economics. This means that final 
authority is vested in men who are utterly devoid of any preparatory 
training that would make them competent to decide on the questions at 
hand. 

The same holds true of every other problem. It’s always a majority of 
ignorant and incompetent people who decide on each measure. The 
composition of the institution does not change, while the problems to be 
dealt with come from the most varied spheres of public life. An intelligent 
judgment would be possible only if different deputies had the authority to 
deal with different issues. It’s out of the question to think that the same 
people are qualified to decide on transportation questions as well as, say, 
on questions of foreign policy—unless each is a universal genius. But 
scarcely more than one true genius appears in a century. 

Here we are scarcely ever dealing with real thinkers, but only with 
dilettantes who are as narrow-minded as they are conceited and arrogant— 
intellectual prostitutes of the worst kind. That’s why these honorable 
gentlemen show such astonishing levity in debating matters that would 
demand the most painstaking consideration, even from great minds. 
Measures of momentous importance for the future existence of the state 


119 


MEIN KAMPF 


are discussed in an atmosphere more suited to the card-table. Indeed, the 
latter would be a much more fitting occupation for these gentlemen than 
that of deciding the destinies of a race. 
Of course, it would be unfair to assume that every member in such a 
parliament was endowed by nature with such a small sense of responsibility. 
No, by no means. 


3.14 THE DESTRUCTION OF CHARACTER 


But this system, by forcing the individual to pass judgment on questions 
for which he is not competent, gradually debases his moral character. Nobody 
will have the courage to say, “Gentlemen, I’m afraid we know nothing about 
what we are talking about. I for one have no competency in the matter at all.” 
(Besides, if such a declaration were made, it wouldn’t change matters very 
much; such outspoken honesty would not be understood. The person who 
made the declaration would be deemed an honorable ass who shouldn’t be 
allowed to spoil the game.) Those who know human nature know that nobody 
likes to be considered a fool among his associates; and in certain circles, 
honesty is taken as a measure of stupidity. 

Thus even a man who was originally honest, once he finds himself 
elected to parliament, may eventually be forced to acquiesce in a line of 
conduct that is base in itself, and which amounts to a betrayal of the public 
trust. This destroys every real sense of honor that might occasionally rise 
up in the conscience of one person or another. Finally, the otherwise upright 
deputy will succeed in persuading himself that he is by no means the worst 
of the lot, and that by playing along, he may prevent something worse from 
happening. 

An objection may be raised here. It may be said that, of course, the 
individual member may not have a knowledge of what’s required for 
addressing this or that question. But in sucha case, the party sets up special 
committees of experts who have more than the required knowledge for 
dealing with the questions before them. 

At first glance, that argument seems sound. But then another question 
arises: namely, why are 500 persons elected if only a few have the wisdom 
that is required to deal with the more important problems? 

Yes—this is the worm in the apple. 


120 


CHAPTER 3 


3.15 JEWISH DEMOCRACY 


It isn’t the aim of our modern democratic parliamentary system to bring 
together an assembly of intelligent and well-informed men. The aim rather 
is to bring together a group of non-entities who are dependent on others 
for their views, and who can be all the more easily led, the narrower their 
mental outlook. This is the only way that party policy—according to the 
evil meaning it has today—can be put into effect. 

Only in this way is it possible for the wire-puller, who exercises real 
control, to remain in the dark, so that he personally can never be held 
accountable. Under such circumstances, none of the decisions taken, no 
matter how disastrous they may be, can be laid at the foot of the scoundrel 
who is truly to blame. All responsibility is shifted to the shoulders of the 
party as a whole. 

In practice, no actual responsibility remains. It arises only from 
personal duty and not from the obligations that rest with a parliamentary 
assembly of empty talkers. 

The parliamentary institution attracts liars and moles, people who shun 
the light of day. No upright man, who is ready to accept personal 
responsibility for his acts, will be attracted to such an institution. 

That’s the reason why this brand of democracy has become a tool in 
the hand of that race that, because of its inner goals, must shun the open 
light—as it has always done and always will do. Only the Jew can praise 
an institution which is as corruptand false as himself. 

By contrast, consider a truly German democracy. Here the leader is 
freely chosen and is obliged to accept full responsibility for all his actions 
and omissions. Problems are not put to a majority vote, but they are decided 
upon by the individual. As a guarantee of responsibility for those decisions, 
he pledges his worldly belongings, and even his life. 

The objection may be raised here that, under such conditions, it would 
be very difficult to find a man who would be ready to devote himself to so 
risky a task. There is only one answer to that: 

Thank God that our German democracy will prevent the chance 
careerist, who may be intellectually worthless and a moral slacker, from 
coming to power in devious ways. The fear of undertaking such far- 
reaching responsibilities, under German democracy, will scare off the 
ignorant and the incompetent. 

But if it happens that such a person sneaks in, it will be easy enough to 
ruthlessly identify and challenge him—somewhat as follows: “Be gone, 


121 


MEIN KAMPF 


you scoundrel! Don’t soil these steps with your feet; these are the steps of 
the Pantheon of History, and they are not meant for status-seekers but for 
men of noble character!” 

Such were the views I formed after two years of attending the sessions 
of the Viennese Parliament. 

Then I never went back. 


3.16 THE COLLAPSING DUAL MONARCHY 


The parliamentary regime was one of the chief reasons why the 
Habsburg State steadily declined during its final years. The more that the 
German element was whittled away through parliamentary procedure, the 
stronger was the system of playing off the various constituent nationalities 
against the other. In the Reichsrat, this always occurred at the expense of 
the Germans, which meant that the results were detrimental to the empire 
as a whole. At the close of the century, even a simpleton could see that the 
cohesive forces in the Dual Monarchy could no longer counterbalance the 
separatist tendencies of the provincial nationalities. 

On the contrary. 

The measures that the state adopted for its own maintenance became 
increasingly mean-spirited; correspondingly, general disrespect for the state 
increased. Hungary and the various Slav provinces gradually ceased to 
identify themselves with the unified monarchy, and therefore they didn’t 
feel its weakness as in any way detrimental to themselves. Rather, they 
welcomed those symptoms of decay. They looked forward to the final 
dissolution of the state, not to its recovery. 

Complete collapse was temporarily averted in parliament by the 
humiliating concessions that were made to all kinds of annoying demands, 
at the expense of the Germans. Everywhere the defense of the state rested 
on playing off the various nationalities against one another. But the general 
trend of this development was always directed against the Germans. Given 
that the right of royal succession gave a certain influence to the Archduke 
Franz Ferdinand, a policy of increasing the power of the Czechs was 
systematically enacted throughout the administration.? With all the means 


° Franz Ferdinand (1863-1914) supported equal representation for the Slavic 
nations of the empire. His assassination on 28 June 1914 precipitated World 
Warl. 


122 


CHAPTER 3 


at his disposal, the heir to the Dual Monarchy personally furthered a policy 
aimed at eliminating the influence of the Germans—or at least he defended 
that policy. Purely German districts were gradually but decisively brought 
within the danger zone of the mixed languages. Even in Lower Austria, 
this process began to make increasingly rapid progress, and Vienna was 
looked upon by the Czechs as their largest city. 

The central idea of this new Habsburg was to establish a Slavic State in 
Central Europe. The Czech language was favored. (The Archduke’s wife 
had formerly been a Czech countess, and she was wedded to the prince by 
an arranged marriage. She came from an environment of traditional hostility 
to the Germans.) This new state was to be constructed on a purely Catholic 
basis, so as to serve as a bulwark against Orthodox Russia. As had happened 
often in Habsburg history, religion was thus exploited to serve a purely 
political policy—and in this case, a fatal policy, at least for the Germans. 

The result was lamentable in many respects. 

Neither the House of Habsburg nor the Catholic Church received the 
reward that they expected. 

Habsburg lost the throne, and the Church lost a great state. 

By employing religious motives in the service of politics, a spirit was 
aroused that the instigators had never thought possible. 

The attempt to root out Germandom in the old monarchy led to the 
emergence of the Pan-German Movement in Austria. 

In the 1880s, Manchester Liberalism, which was fundamentally Jewish 
in its outlook, had reached or even passed the zenith of its influence in the 
Dual Monarchy.!° The reaction that set in arose not from social but from 
nationalistic tendencies, as was always the case in old Austria. The instinct 
for self-preservation drove the Germans to vigorously defend themselves. 
Economic considerations only slowly began to grow in influence; but they 
were of secondary concern. But of the general political chaos, two party 
organizations emerged. The one was more of a national character, and the 
other more social. Both were highly interesting and instructive for the future. 

After the humiliating end of the War of 1866, the House of Habsburg 
contemplated a military revenge.'' Only the tragic death of Emperor 
Maximilian of Mexico prevented a still closer collaboration with France. 
'0 Manchester Liberalism was an economic school of thought that originated in 


Manchester, England in the mid-19th century. It was “Jewish” insofar as it 
promoted free trade and globalism generally. 


'! The War of 1866 was essentially a German civil war, in which Prussia 
triumphed over the Austrian-Germans. 


123 


MEIN KAMPF 


The chief blame for Maximilian’s disastrous expedition was attributed to 
Napoleon III; the fact that the French abandoned him aroused a general 
feeling of indignation. Yet the Habsburgs were still lying in wait for their 
opportunity. If the War of 1870-71 had not been such a singular triumph, 
the Viennese Court might have risked a bloody venture in order to avenge 
Sadowa.” But when the first reports arrived from the Franco-German 
battlefield, which, though true, seemed miraculous and almost incredible, 
the ‘wisest’ of all monarchs recognized that it was an inopportune moment, 
and tried to put the best face on a bad situation. 

The heroic conflict of those two years [1870-71] produced an even 
greater miracle. With the Habsburgs, the change of attitude came only from 
the pressure of circumstances, never from a heartfelt urge. The German 
people of the Ostmark, however, were entranced by the triumphant glory 
of the newly-established German Reich, and were profoundly moved when 
they saw the dream of their fathers resurrected in a glorious reality. 

Let there be no mistake: The true German-Austrian realized, from this 
time onward, that K6niggratz was the tragic but necessary pre-condition 
for the re-establishment of an empire that would no longer be burdened 
with the morbidity of the old alliance. Above all, the German-Austrian 
came to feel, in the very depths of his own being, that the historic mission 
of the House of Habsburg had come to an end, and that the new empire 
could choose only a kaiser whose heroic convictions were worthy to wear 
the ‘Crown of the Rhine.’ It was right and just that destiny be praised for 
having chosen a scion of that house which, in Frederick the Great, gave 
the nation an elevated and shining symbol for all time to come. 


3.17 REBELLION OF THE GERMAN-AUSTRIANS 


After the great war [of 1870-71], the House of Habsburg desperately 
set to work to slowly and deliberately root out the dangerous German 
element—whose inner feelings and attitude could not be doubted. Such a 
process would be the final result of the Slavization policy. It was then that 
the fire of rebellion burned among the doomed people, such as has never 
been seen in modern German history. 


2 The War of 1870, also known as the Franco-Prussian War, resulted in German 
victory, the fall of Paris, and the absorption of Alsace-Lorraine into the German 
empire. ‘Sadowa’ (‘K6niggratz,’ in German) is present-day Sadova, in the Czech 
Republic; it was the decisive battle in the war, and ended in Prussian victory. 


124 


CHAPTER 3 


For the first time, nationalists and patriots were transformed into rebels. 

Not rebels against the nation or the state as such, but rebels against that 
form of government that they were convinced would inevitably bring about 
the ruin of their own people. 

For the first time in modern history, the traditional dynastic patriotism 
and national love of fatherland and people were in open conflict. 

It was to the merit of the pan-German movement in Austria during the 
1890s that it pointed out clearly and unequivocally that a state is entitled 
to demand respect and protection only when it is administered in 
accordance with the interests of the nation—or at least not in a manner 
detrimental to those interests. 

The authority of the state can never be an end in itself. If that were so, 
any kind of tyranny would be inviolable and sacred. 

If a government uses the instruments of power in its hands for the 
purpose of leading a people to ruin, then rebellion is not only the right of 
every individual citizen—it is his duty. 

The question of whether and when such a situation exists cannot be 
answered by theoretical dissertations, but only by the exercise of force; and 
it is success that decides the issue. 

Every govemment—even one that is the worst possible, and even though 
it may have betrayed the nation’s trust in a thousand ways—will claim that 
its duty is to uphold the authority of the state. Its adversaries, who are fighting 
for national self-preservation, must use the same weapons that the government 
uses, if they are to prevail against such a rule and secure their own freedom 
and independence. Therefore the conflict will be fought with ‘legal’ means as 
long as the power to be overthrown uses them. But the insurgents won’t 
hesitate to apply illegal means if the oppressor himself uses them. 

Generally speaking, we must not forget that the highest aim of human 
existence is not the maintenance of a state of government, but rather the 
preservation of the species. 


3.18 HUMAN RIGHTS OVERRIDE STATES’ RIGHTS 


If the species is in danger of being oppressed or even eliminated, the 
question of legality is only of secondary importance. The established power 
may, in such a case, employ only those means that are alleged to be ‘legal.’ 
And yet the instinct of self-preservation on the part of the oppressed will 
always justify, to the greater degree, the use of all possible resources. 


125 


MEIN KAMPF 


Only on the basis of this principle was it possible to conduct those 
struggles against foreign enslavement or domestic oppression, of which 
history supplies us with many magnificent examples. 

Human rights surpass the rights of the state. 

But if a people be defeated in the struggle for its human rights, this 
means that its weight has proved too light in the scale of destiny, to be 
worthy of survival on this earth. When a people is unwilling or unable to 
fight for its existence, then Providence, in its eternal justice, will decree 
that people’s end. 

The world is not here for cowards. 

Austria affords a very clear and striking example of how easy it is for 
tyranny to hide its head under the cloak of so-called ‘legality.’ 

The legal exercise of power in the Habsburg State was then based on 
the anti-German attitude of the parliament, with its non-German majorities, 
and on the dynastic House, which was also hostile to the German element. 
The whole authority of the state was incorporated in these two factors. Any 
attempt to alter the lot of the Germans through these two factors would 
have been absurd. Those who advised the ‘legal’ way as the only possible 
means offered no resistance; no policy of resistance could have been put 
into effect through legal measures. To follow the advice of the legalist 
counsellors would have meant the inevitable ruin of the German element 
within the monarchy. And this disaster would have come very soon. The 
Germans were actually saved only by the collapse of the state. 

The spectacled theorist would still rather die for his doctrine than for 
his people. 

Because men have made laws, he subsequently comes to think that they 
exist for the sake of the laws. 

The pan-German movement rendered a great service by abolishing all 
such nonsense—to the horror of all doctrinaire theorists and other fetish- 
worshippers. 

When the Habsburgs attempted to attack the German element through 
all available means, the Pan-German Party hit back ruthlessly against the 
‘illustrious’ dynasty. This party was the first to probe into the corrupt 
condition of the state. In doing so, they opened the eyes of hundreds of 
thousands. To its credit, it liberated the high ideal of love for one’s country 
from the embrace of this deplorable dynasty. 

When that party first made its appearance, it secured a large following— 
in fact, almost an avalanche. But the initial successes didn’t last. When I 
came to Vienna, the Pan-German Party had been eclipsed by the Christian- 


126 


CHAPTER 3 


Socialist Party, which had meanwhile come into power. Indeed, the Pan- 
German Party had been reduced to almost complete insignificance. 

The rise and fall of the pan-German movement on the one hand, and 
the unprecedented progress of the Christian-Socialist Party on the other, 
became a classic object of study for me. They played an important part in 
the development of my own views. 

When I came to Vienna, all my sympathies were exclusively with the 
pan-German movement. 

I was impressed by the fact that they had the courage to shout ‘Heil 
Hohenzollern,’ and | rejoiced at their determination to consider themselves 
an integral part of the German Reich, from which they were only 
temporarily separated. They never missed an opportunity to explain their 
attitude in public, which raised my enthusiasm and confidence. To publicly 
avow one’s principles on every problem that concerned Germanism, and 
to never compromise, seemed to me the only way of saving our people. 
What I couldn’t understand was how this movement declined so soon after 
such a magnificent start. And it was no less incomprehensible that the 
Christian-Socialists should gain such tremendous power within such a short 
time. They had just reached the pinnacle of their popularity. 

When I began to compare those two movements, Fate gave me the best 
means of understanding the causes of this puzzling problem—in this case, 
accelerated by my own sad circumstances. 


3.19 SCHONERER AND LUEGER 


I?ll begin my analysis with an account of the two men who must be 
regarded as the founders and leaders of the two movements: George von 
Scho6nerer and Dr. Kar] Lueger. 

As far as personality goes, both were far above the level and stature of 
the so-called parliamentary figures. They lived lives of immaculate and 
irreproachable purity amidst the morass of general political corruption. My 
initial sympathies lay with the Pan-German representative, Schénerer; it 
was only afterwards, and gradually, that I felt an equal liking for the 
Christian-Socialist leader. 

When I compared their respective abilities, Schénerer seemed to me a 
better and more profound thinker on fundamental problems. He foresaw 
the inevitable downfall of the Austrian State more clearly and accurately 
than anyone else. If this warning to the Habsburg Empire had been heeded 


127 


MEIN KAMPF 


in Germany, the disastrous World War, which pitted Germany against the 
whole of Europe, would never have taken place. 

But though Sch6nerer succeeded in penetrating to the essentials of a 
problem, he was frequently mistaken in his judgment of men. 

And here, on the other hand, lay Dr. Lueger’s strength. 

He had arare gift of insight into human nature, and he was very careful 
not to take men as something better than they really were. He based his 
plans on the practical possibilities that human life offered him, whereas 
Schénerer had only little understanding in that respect. All ideas that this 
pan-German had were theoretically right, but he didn’t have the 
forcefulness or understanding necessary to put his ideas across to the broad 
masses. He was unable to formulate them for the masses, whose powers of 
comprehension are limited, and will always remain so. Therefore all 
Schénerer’s knowledge was only visionary wisdom; he never could 
succeed in putting it into practice. 

This lack of insight into human nature led him to err in estimating the 
forces behind certain movements andthe inherent strength of old institutions. 

Schonerer indeed realized that his questions involved the nature of a 
worldview. But he didn’t understand that only the broad masses of a nation 
can make such convictions—which are almost religious in nature—prevail. 

Unfortunately, he only poorly understood how weak the fighting spirit of 
the so-called bourgeoisie is. That weakness is due to their business interests; 
they are much too afraid of taking risks, and this deters them from acting. 

And generally speaking, a worldview has no prospect of success unless 
the broad masses declare themselves ready to act as its standard-bearers, 
and to fight on its behalf—wherever and to whatever degree necessary. 

This failure to understand the importance of the lower strata of society 
resulted in a very inadequate conception of the social question. 

In all this, Dr. Lueger was the opposite of Schénerer. 

His profound knowledge of human nature enabled him to correctly judge 
the various social forces, and it saved him from underrating the power of 
existing institutions. And it was perhaps this very quality that enabled him 
to utilize those institutions as a means to serve the purposes of his policy. 

He saw only too clearly that, in our day, the political fighting power of 
the upper classes is quite insignificant; it is incapable of fighting fora great 
new movement until the triumph of that movement is secured. Thus he 
devoted the larger part of his political activity to the task of winning over 
those sections of the population whose existence was in danger, and to 
fostering a militant spirit in them rather than attempting to paralyze it. He 


128 


CHAPTER 3 


was also quick to adopt all available means for winning the support of long- 
established institutions, in order to derive the greatest possible advantage 
for his movement from those old sources of power. 

Thus it was that, first of all, he chose as the social basis of his new 
party a middle class that was threatened with extinction. He thus secured a 
solid following, one that was willing to make great sacrifices and had good 
fighting power. His extremely wise attitude towards the Catholic Church 
rapidly won over large numbers of younger clergy—so much so that the 
old Clerical Party was forced to abandon the field of action or else, which 
was the wiser course, join the new party, in the hope of gradually winning 
back one position after another. 

But it would be a serious injustice to the man if we regarded this as his 
essential characteristic. For he possessed the qualities of an astute tactician, 
and had the true genius of a great reformer; but all these were limited by 
his exact perception of the possibilities at hand, and also of his own 
capabilities. 

The goals that this really eminent man decided to pursue were intensely 
practical. He wished to conquer Vienna, the heart of the monarchy. It was 
from Vienna that the last pulses of life beat through the diseased, worn-out 
body of the crumbling empire. If the heart could be made healthier, the 
others parts of the body were bound to revive. That idea was correct in 
principle. But the time required to make this happen was strictly limited. 

And that was the man’s weakness. 

His achievements as mayor of the city of Vienna are immortal, in the 
best sense of the word. But all that could not save the monarchy—it came 
too late. 

His rival, Sch6nerer, saw this more clearly. 

All of Dr. Lueger’s practical efforts were marvellously successful; but 
the hoped-for results never materialized. 

Schonerer failed to attain his goals, but his most terrible fears came true. 

Thus both these men failed to attain their ultimate objectives. Lueger 
couldn’t save Austria, and Schénerer couldn’t save the German people in 
Austria from ruin. 

To study the causes of failure in the case of these two parties is to learn 
a highly instructive lesson for our own time. This is especially useful for 
my friends, because in many points the circumstances of our own day are 
similar to those of that time. Therefore such a lesson may help us to guard 
against the mistakes that brought one of those movements to an end, and 
rendered the other sterile. 


129 


MEIN KAMPF 


3.20 THE CAUSES OF SCHONERER’S FAILURE 


In my opinion, the collapse of the pan-German movement in Austria 
must be attributed to three causes. 

First, the leaders didn’t have a clear concept of the importance of the 
social problem, particularly for a new and revolutionary party. 

Schénerer and his followers directed their attention primarily to the 
bourgeoisie. For that reason, the party was bound to turn out mediocre and 
tame. 

The German bourgeoisie, especially in its upper circles, is pacifist even 
to the point of complete self-abnegation—though some may not be aware 
of this—wherever the internal affairs of the nation or state are concerned. 
In good times, which in this case means times of good government, such a 
psychological attitude makes this class extraordinarily valuable to the state. 
But when there is bad government, such a quality has a destructive effect. 
In order to assure the possibility of carrying through a really serious 
struggle, the pan-German movement should have devoted its efforts to 
winning over the masses. The failure to do this left the movement, from 
the very beginning, without the elemental impulse that such a wave needs 
if it’s not to shortly ebb away. 

In failing to see the truth of this principle clearly at the very outset of 
the movement, and in neglecting to put it into practice, the new party made 
an initial mistake from which it couldn’t recover. The numerous moderate 
bourgeois elements admitted into the movement increasingly determined 
its internal orientation. This preempted all further prospects of gaining any 
appreciable support among the masses. Under such conditions, the 
movement couldn’t get beyond mere discussion and criticism. Quasi- 
religious faith and the spirit of sacrifice were no longer found in the 
movement. Their place was taken by the effort towards ‘positive’ 
collaboration, which in this case meant acknowledging the existing state 
of affairs. Such a gradual whittling away of the rough corners of the 
questions in dispute resulted in the making of a dishonorable peace. 

Such was the fate of the pan-German movement because, from the 
start, the leaders didn’t realize that the most important condition of success 
was to recruit their followers from the broad masses. The movement thus 
became ‘bourgeois’ and ‘respectable’-—and only moderately ‘radical.’ 


130 


CHAPTER 3 


3.21 PAN-GERMANS AND PARLIAMENT 


From this failure came the second cause of its rapid decline. 

The position of the Germans in Austria was already desperate when 
pan-Germanism arose. Year after year, parliament was being used more 
and more as an instrument for the slow destruction of the German-Austrian 
people. The only hope for an eleventh-hour effort to save it lay in the 
overthrow of the parliamentary system; but there was very little prospect 
of this happening. 

Thus the movement was confronted with a question of primary 
importance: 

To overthrow the parliament, should the pan-Germanists have entered 
it ‘to undermine it from within,’ as they say? Or should they have attacked 
the institution as such from the outside? 

They went in, and came out defeated. 

But they were compelled to enter. 

In order to wage an effective war against such a power from the outside, 
indomitable courage and a ready spirit of sacrifice are necessary weapons. 
In such cases, the bull must be seized by the horns. Furious attacks may drive 
you to the ground again and again. But if you have a stout heart, you will 
stand up, perhaps with broken bones. And only after a long and tough struggle 
will you triumph. New fighters are attracted to a cause by the appeal of great 
sacrifices made for its sake, until at last tenacity is rewarded with success. 

For such a result, however, the children of the the great masses are 
necessary. 

They alone have the requisite determination and tenacity to fight 
through to the end. 

But the pan-German movement didn’t have these broad masses, and 
so the only other solution was to enter parliamcnt. 

It would be a mistake to think that this decision resulted from a long 
series of internal moral hesitations, or that it was the outcome of careful 
calculation. No; they didn’t even consider another solution. Those who 
participated in this blunder were motivated by vague notions regarding the 
significance and effect of participating in an institution that they had 
condemned on principle. In general, they hoped that they would thus be 
able to promote their cause to the great masses of people, because they 
could speak before ‘the forum of the whole nation.’ Also, it seemed 
reasonable to believe that by attacking the root of the evil, they would be 
more effective than by attacking from outside. They believed that, if 


131 


MEIN KAMPF 


protected by the immunity of parliament, the position of the individual 
protagonists would be strengthened, and that therefore the force of their 
attacks would be enhanced. 

In reality, everything turned out very differently. 

The forum before which the pan-German representatives spoke hadn’t 
grown greater, but had actually become smaller. Each spoke only to the 
circle that was ready to listen to him or could read the report of his speech 
in the newspapers. 

But the largest forum of direct listeners isn’t the parliamentary 
auditorium; it’s the great public meeting. 

Here alone there will be thousands of men who have come simply to 
hear what a speaker has to say, whereas in parliament only a few hundred 
are present. For the most part, they are there only to earn their daily 
attendance fees and not to be enlightened by the wisdom of one of the 
‘representatives of the people.’ 

Above all: The same public is always present, and it never wishes to 
learn anything new. Setting aside the question of its intelligence, it lacks 
even that modest amount of will power that’s necessary for learning. 

Not one of the peoples’ representatives will honor a superior truth and 
devote himself to its service. No, not one of them will do this, unless he 
has grounds for hoping that, by such a conversion, he can retain the 
representation of his constituency in the coming legislature. Therefore, only 
when it becomes obvious that the old party is likely to have a bad time at 
the forthcoming elections, will those models of manly virtue set out in 
search of a new party or a new policy that may have better electoral 
prospects. But of course, this change of position will be accompanied by a 
veritable deluge of high moral justifications. And thus it always happens 
that, when an existing party has incurred such general disfavor among the 
public that it is threatened with a crushing defeat, then a great migration 
begins. The parliamentary rats abandon the party ship. 

All this happens not because the affected individuals have become 
better informed on the questions at issue and have resolved to act 
accordingly. These superficial changes are evidence only of that gift of 
clairvoyance that warns the parliamentary flea at the right moment, and 
causes him to hop into another warm party bed. 

To speak before such a forum signifies casting pearls before a certain 
well-known animal. It is truly worthless! The result will always be negative. 

And that’s what actually happened. The pan-German deputies could 
have talked themselves hoarse: but to no result. 


132 


CHAPTER 3 


The press either ignored them totally or so mutilated their speeches 
that the logical consistency was destroyed, and the meaning twisted around 
in such a way that the public got the wrong impression of the aims of the 
new movement. What the individual members said wasn’t important. The 
important matter was what people read as coming from them. This 
consisted of mere extracts that had been taken out of context, and gave an 
impression of incoherent nonsense—as was in fact intended. Thus the only 
public before which they really spoke consisted of a mere 500 
parliamentarians—and that says it all. 

But the worst was the following: 

The pan-German movement could only hope for success if the leaders 
realized from the very start that it was not a question of a new party as of 
anew worldview. This alone could arouse the inner moral forces that were 
necessary for such a gigantic struggle. And for this struggle, the leaders 
must be men of first-class minds and indomitable courage. 

If the struggle on behalf of a worldview is not led by men of heroic 
spirit who are ready to sacrifice everything, it will soon become impossible 
to find real warriors who are ready to die for the cause. A man who fights 
only for his own existence has little remaining for society. 

In order to secure the requirements for success, everyone concerned 
must understand that the new movement looks to posterity for its honor 
and glory, and that it has nothing to offer to present-day members. If a 
movement offers a large number of positions and offices to be filled, the 
number of inferior candidates will constantly grow. Eventually, a day will 
come when there will be such a preponderance of political profiteers that 
the original combatants will now scarcely recognize their own party. They 
may even be ejected by the later arrivals as unwanted ballast. At this point, 
the ‘mission’ of the movement is lost. 

Once the pan-Germanists decided to collaborate with parliament, they 
were no longer leaders and combatants in a popular movement, but merely 
“parliamentarians.” The movement thus sank to the level of a common 
political party, and no longer had the strength to face a hostile fate and defy 
the risk of martyrdom. Instead of fighting, the pan-German leaders fell into 
the habit of ‘talking’ and ‘negotiating.’ These new parliamentarians soon 
found that it was a more satisfactory, and less risky, way of fulfilling their 
task: to defend their new worldview with the intellectual weapon of 
parliamentary rhetoric rather than take up a fight in which they would risk 
their lives. Such a fight would have uncertain outcomes, and offer no 
possibility of personal gain. 


133 


MEIN KAMPF 


3.22 THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SPOKEN WORD 


Once they had members in parliament, their outside supporters hoped 
and waited for miracles. Of course, no such miracles occurred, or could 
occur. The supporters of the movement soon grew impatient, because 
reports they read about their own deputies was in no way up to their 
expectations. The reason for this wasn’t hard to find. It was due to the fact 
that a hostile press failed to give a true account of what the pan-German 
deputies were actually doing. 

As the new deputies became accustomed to this mild form of 
‘revolution,’ and to the provincial diets, they gradually became reluctant 
to resume the more hazardous work of expounding the movement’s 
principles to the broad masses of the people. 

Mass meetings in public became rarer and rarer, though these are the 
only means of exercising an effective influence on people. Here, the 
influence comes from direct personal contact, and earns the support of large 
numbers. 

Once the parliamentary platform was substituted for the beer-hall table, 
where thousands were addressed, and once speeches were no longer 
addressed to the people directly but to the so-called ‘chosen’ 
representatives, the pan-German movement lost its popular character. It 
soon degenerated to the level of an academic discussion club. 

Thus, the misleading impression created by the press was no longer 
corrected by personal contact with the people through public meetings, 
wherein a true account might be given. The end result of this neglect was 
that the word ‘pan-German’ came to have an unpleasant sound in the ears 
of the masses. 

The knights of the pen and the literary snobs of today must realize that 
the great transformations that have taken place in this world were never 
conducted by a goose-quill! 

No—the task of the pen must always be reserved to that of presenting 
the theoretical foundations. 

The force that has ever and always set in motion great historical 
avalanches of religious and political movements is the magic power of the 
spoken word. 

The broad masses of a population are more amenable to the appeal of 
rhetoric than to any other force. All great movements are popular 
movements. They are the volcanic eruptions of human passions and 
emotions, stirred into activity either by the ruthless Goddess of Distress or 


134 


CHAPTER 3 


by the torch of the spoken word cast into the people’s midst. In no case 
have great movements been set afoot by the syrupy effusions of literary 
aesthetes and drawing-room heroes. 
A nation’s destiny can be averted only by a storm of hot passion. But 
only those who are passionate themselves can arouse passion in others. 
It’s only the capacity for passionate feeling that, like hammer blows, 
will open the door to the hearts of the people. 


3.23 EFFECT ON THE MASS 


He who is incapable of passionate feeling and speech was never chosen 
by Providence to proclaim its will. 

Therefore a mere writer should stick to his ink-bottle and busy himself 
with theoretical questions, if he has the requisite ability and knowledge. 
He has been neither born nor chosen to be a leader. 

A movement that has great ends to achieve must carefully guard against 
the danger of losing contact with the masses of the people. 

Every question encountered must be examined primarily from this 
viewpoint, and the decision to be made must always be accordingly. 

The movement must avoid everything that might weaken its power of 
influencing the masses—not from ‘demagogic’ motives but because of the 
simple fact that no great idea, no matter how sublime and exalted it may 
appear, can be realized in practice without the effective power of the 
popular masses. 

Hard reality alone must mark the way to the goal. Unwillingness to 
walk the road of hardship means, only too often in this world, the total 
renunciation of one’s aims and purposes—whether consciously willed or 
not. 

As soon as the pan-German leaders accepted the parliamentary 
principle and moved the center of their activities away from the people, 
they sacrificed the future for the sake of a cheap momentary success. 

They chose the easier way in the struggle, and in doing so rendered 
themselves unworthy of final victory. 

While in Vienna, I used to seriously ponder over these two questions. 
I saw that the main reason for the collapse of the pan-German movement 
lay in the fact that these very questions were underappreciated. In my 
opinion, the movement seemed chosen to lead the German element in 
Austria. 


135 


MEIN KAMPF 


These first two blunders, which led to the downfall of the pan-German 
movement, were very closely related. Faulty recognition of the inner 
driving forces that push great movements forward led to an inadequate 
appreciation of the part played by the broad masses. The result was that 
too little attention was given to the social problem, and that attempts to 
capture the minds of the lower classes were too few and too weak. Another 
failure was in accepting the parliamentary policy. 

If there had been a proper appreciation of the tremendous powers of 
endurance always shown by the masses in revolutionary movements, a 
different attitude towards the social problem and propaganda would have 
been taken. The movement’s center wouldn’t have been transferred to 
parliament, but would have remained in the workshops and the streets. 


3.24 THE ‘AWAY-FROM-ROME’ MOVEMENT 


There was a third mistake, one that also had its roots in the failure to 
understand the value of the masses. The masses are first set in motion, ina 
definite direction, by men of superior talents. But once in motion, they are 
like a flywheel; they sustain the momentum and steady balance of the 
offensive. 

The policy of the pan-German leaders in deciding to carry through a 
hard struggle against the Catholic Church can be explained only by 
attributing it to an inadequate understanding of the spiritual nature of the 
people. 

The reasons why thenew party engaged in a violent campaign against 
Rome were as follows: 

As soon as the House of Habsburg had definitely decided to transform 
Austria into a Slav State, all sorts of means were adopted that seemed to 
serve that end. The Habsburg rulers had no scruples of conscience about 
exploiting even religious institutions in the service of this new ‘State Idea.’ 

One of the many methods thus employed was the use of Czech parishes 
and their clergy as instruments for spreading Slav hegemony throughout 
Austria. 

This proceeding was carried out as follows: 

Czech priests were appointed in purely German districts. They 
gradually and steadily pushed forward the interests of the Czech people 
before those of the Church, and thus became germ cells in the de- 
Germanization process. 


136 


CHAPTER 3 


Unfortunately the German-Austrian clergy completely failed to counter 
this procedure. Not only were they incapable of taking a similar initiative 
on the German side, but they showed themselves unable to meet the Czech 
offensive with adequate resistance. Germandom was accordingly pushed 
backwards, slowly but steadily, through the perversion of religious belief 
on the one side, and the lack of resistance on the other side. 

Such tactics were used in dealing with the smaller problems; and in 
larger matters, the situation was not very different. 

The anti-German aims pursued by the Habsburgs, especially through 
the higher clergy, didn’t meet with any vigorous resistance, while the 
clerical representatives of the German interests withdrew completely to the 
rear. 

The general impression could only be that the Catholic clergy as such 
grossly neglected the rights of the German population. 

Therefore it looked as if the Catholic Church was not in sympathy with 
the German people, but rather that it unjustly supported their enemies. The 
root of the whole evil, especially in Schénerer’s opinion, lay in the fact that 
the leadership of the Catholic Church was not in Germany, and that this 
fact alone accounted for the hostile attitude of the Church towards the 
interests of our people. 

The so-called cultural problem receded almost completely into the 
background, as was generally the case everywhere throughout Austria at 
that time. In assuming a hostile attitude towards the Catholic Church, the 
pan-German leaders were influenced not so much by the Church’s position 
on science, etc., but rather because of its failure to defend German rights, 
and conversely, its aid and support for Slavic arrogance and greed. 

George Schénerer wasn’t a man who did things half-way. He went into 
battle against the Church because he was convinced that this was the only 
way to save the German people. The “Away-from-Rome” movement 
seemed the most powerful, but at the same time most difficult, way of 
attacking the adversary’s citadel. Schonerer believed that if this movement 
succeeded, the tragic division between the two great religious denominations 
in Germany would be wiped out, and the inner forces of the German Reich 
and nation would be enormously enhanced by such a victory. 

But both the premise and the conclusion in this case were erroneous. 

It was undoubtedly true that the national powers of resistance, in 
everything concerning Germanism as such, were much weaker among the 
German Catholic clergy than among their non-German brethren, especially 
the Czechs. 


137 


MEIN KAMPF 


And only a fool could be unaware of the fact that it never entered the 
mind of the German clergy to take the offensive on behalf of German 
interests. 

But at the same time, everyone who isn’t blind to facts must admit that 
all this can be attributed to a characteristic under which all we Germans 
must suffer: that is, the objective way in which we regard our own 
nationality, along with everything else. 

While the Czech priest adopted a subjective attitude towards his own 
peopleand only an objective attitude towards the Church, the German priest 
showed a subjective devotion to his Church and remained objective in 
regard to his nation. This phenomenon, unfortunately, can be found 
occurring in exactly the same way in thousands of other cases. 

It is by no means a peculiar legacy from Catholicism; but it is 
something in us that quickly corrodes almost every institution, especially 
institutions of state and those that have ideal aims. 

Take, for example, the attitude of our state officials in regard to the 
efforts made for bringing about a national resurgence. Compare this attitude 
with the stand that the officials of any other nation would have taken in 
such a case. Or should we believe that the military officers of any other 
country in the world would refuse to come forward on behalf of national 
aspirations, and would rather hide behind the phrase ‘state authority,’ as 
has been the case in our country during the last five years? Or let us take 
another example. In regard to the Jewish question, don’t both Christian 
denominations take up a standpoint today that responds to neither national 
requirements nor to real needs of religion? Compare the attitude of a Jewish 
rabbi towards any question, even an insignificant one, concerning Jewry 
as a race, with that of the majority of our clergy, whether Catholic or 
Protestant! 

We observe the same phenomenon wherever it is a matter of defending 
an abstract idea. 

‘State authority,’ ‘democracy,’ ‘pacifism,’ ‘international solidarity,’ 
etc.—all such notions become rigid, dogmatic concepts with us. And the 
more vital the general necessities of the nation, the more will they be judged 
exclusively in light of those concepts. 

This unfortunate habit of looking at all national demands from the 
viewpoint of a pre-conceived notion makes it impossible for us to see the 
subjective side of a thing that objectively contradicts one’s own doctrine. 
It finally leads to a complete reversal of means and ends. Any attempt at a 
national revival will be opposed if a pre-condition is that a bad and 


138 


CHAPTER 3 


pernicious regime must first of all be overthrown; such an action will be 
considered as a violation of ‘state authority.’ 

From this standpoint, “state authority’ is not a means to serve an end 
but rather, to the mind of the dogmatic believer in objectivity, an end in 
itself. He looks upon that as sufficient apology for his own miserable life. 
Such people would raise an outcry if, for instance, anyone should attempt 
to set up a dictatorship, even if it were a Frederick the Great, and even 
though the parliamentary politicians were small and incompetent men. 

To such sticklers for abstract principles, the law of democracy is more 
sacred than the welfare of the nation. Accordingly, such men will defend 
the worst kind of tyranny, though it may be leading a people to ruin, 
because it is the fleeting embodiment of ‘state authority.’ Others will reject 
even a highly beneficent government if it should fall short of their notion 
of ‘democracy.’ 

In the same way, our German pacifist will remain silent while the 
nation is groaning under oppression by a vicious military power, if this 
condition calls for active resistance; such resistance means the employment 
of physical force, which is against the spirit of the pacifist society. The 
international German socialist may be plundered by his comrades around 
the world in the name of ‘solidarity,’ but he responds with fraternal 
kindness, and never thinks of retribution, or even of self-defense. Simply 
because he is—a German. 

It may be unpleasant to dwell on such truths, but if something is to be 
changed, we must first acknowledge it. 

The same is true with the weak manner in which German interests are 
promoted and defended by a part of the clergy. 

Such conduct is not the result of a malicious intent, nor is it the 
outcome of orders given from ‘above’; but such a lack of national 
determination is due to defects in our educational system. Instead of 
inculcating a lively sense of German nationality, the aim of the educational 
system is to make the youth submit to ‘the idea’ become idol. 

Education in such abstract notions as ‘democracy,’ ‘international 
socialism,’ ‘pacifism,’ etc., is so hard-and-fast and exclusive, and so purely 
subjective, that they fundamentally influence one’s picture of the world. 
But on the other hand, the attitude towards their own German nationality 
has been very objective from youth upwards. The pacifist (insofar as he is 
a German) who surrenders himself subjectively to the dictates of dogmatic 
principles will always first consider the objective right or wrong of a 
situation when danger threatens. But he will never take his stand in the 


139 


MEIN KAMPF 


ranks of his own people, and fight for them from the sheer instinct of self- 
preservation. 

That this also applies to the different religious denominations is shown 
by the following: 

Insofar as its origin and tradition are based on German ideals, 
Protestantism defends those ideals better. But it fails the moment it is called 
upon to defend national interests, ones that don’t belong to the sphere of 
its ideals and traditional development—or which, for some reason or other, 
may be rejected by that sphere. 

Therefore Protestantism will always take its part in promoting German 
ideals as concerns moral integrity or national education, when the German 
spiritual being, or language, or spiritual freedom are to be defended; these 
represent the principles on which Protestantism itself is grounded. But this 
same Protestantism violently opposes every attempt to rescue the nation 
from the clutches of its mortal enemy. The Protestant attitude towards the 
Jews is more or less rigidly and dogmatically fixed. And yet this is the first 
problem which has to be solved, unless all attempts to bring about a 
German resurgence, or to raise the level of the nation’s standing, are to 
remain senseless and impossible. 

During my sojourn in Vienna, I had ample leisure time to study this 
problem without allowing any prejudices to intervene; and in my daily 
contacts I was able to confirm my view thousands of times. 

In this focal point of various nationalities, it was quite obvious that the 
German pacifist was always and exclusively the one who tried to consider 
his own national interests objectively. But you would never find a Jew who 
took a similar attitude towards his own people. Furthermore, I found that 
only the German Socialist is ‘international’ in the sense that he feels himself 
obliged to demand justice for his own people only by whining and wailing 
to his international comrades. No one could ever charge the Czechs, or 
Poles, or other nations with such conduct. In short, I recognized even then 
that this evil is only partly a result of these doctrines, but mainly the result 
of our totally inadequate system of education, and its resulting lack of 
devotion to our own nation. 

Thus, the first theoretical argument advanced by the pan-German 
leaders in their offensive against Catholicism was quite untenable. 

The only way to remedy this evil is to train the Germans from youth 
upwards to an absolute recognition of the rights of their own people, instead 
of poisoning their minds with the curse of ‘objectivity-—even in matters 
concerning the very maintenance of our own existence. The result of this 


140 


CHAPTER 3 


would be that the Catholic in Germany—just as in Ireland, Poland, or 
France—would be a German above all. But all this presupposes a radical 
change in the national government. 

The strongest proof of this is supplied by what took place at that 
historical juncture when our people were last called, before the tribunal of 
history to defend their own existence in a life-or-death struggle. 

As long as there was no lack of leadership, the people overwhelmingly 
fulfilled their duty and obligations. Whether Protestant pastor or Catholic 
priest, each did his very utmost in helping our powers of resistance to hold 
out—not only in the trenches but also, and even more so, at home. During 
those years, and especially during the first outburst of enthusiasm, in both 
religious camps there was one undivided and sacred German Reich, for 
whose preservation and future existence they all prayed to heaven. 

The pan-German movement in Austria should have asked itself one 
question: Is the maintenance of Germandom in Austria possible or not, as 
long as it remains within the fold of the Catholic faith? If yes, then the 
political party shouldn’t have meddled in religious and denominational 
questions. But if no, then a religious reformation should have been started, 
and not a political party movement. 

Anyone who believes that religious reformation can be achieved 
through the agency of a political organization shows that he has no 
understanding of the development of religious conceptions and doctrines, 
and of how these are given practical effect by the Church. 

No man can serve two masters. And I hold that the foundation or 
overthrow of a religion has far greater consequences than the foundation 
or overthrow of a state, let alone a party. 

It is no counterargument to say that the attacks were only defensive 
measures against attacks from the other side! 

Undoubtedly there have always been unscrupulous rogues who did not 
hesitate to degrade religion to a tool of politics. Nearly always such a 
people had nothing else in mind except to make a business of religions and 
politics. But on the other hand, it would be wrong to hold religion itself, or 
a religious denomination, responsible for a number of rascals who exploit 
the Church for their own base interests, just as they would exploit anything 
else in which they had a part. 

Nothing could be more to the taste of these parliamentary loungers and 
tricksters than to find a scapegoat for their political swindling—even after 
the fact. The moment that religion is attacked and made responsible for his 
personal misdeeds, this shrewd fellow will raise an outcry at once, and call 


141 


MEIN KAMPF 


the world to witness how justified he was in acting as he did, proclaiming 
that he and his eloquence alone have saved the Church. The public, which 
is mostly stupid and forgetful, is incapable of recognizing the real instigator 
of the quarrel in the midst of the ruckus. Frequently it doesn’t even 
remember the beginning of the fight, and so the rogue gets away with his 
stunt. 

A cunning fellow of that sort is well aware that his misdeeds have 
nothing to do with religion. And so he will quietly laugh up his sleeve when 
his honest but artless opponent loses the game and, eventually losing faith 
in humanity, resigns from it all. 

And there is another sense in which it would be wrong to make 
religion, or the Church per se, responsible for individual misdeeds. If one 
compares the magnitude of the organization as it appears to all, with the 
typical weakness of human nature, we will have to admit that the proportion 
of good to bad is more favorable here than anywhere else. Among the 
priests there may, of course, be some who use their sacred calling to further 
their political ambitions. There are clergy who unfortunately forget that in 
the political struggle they should be the guardians of higher truths and not 
the abettors of lies and slander. But for each one of these unworthy 
specimens we can find a thousand or more who fulfil their mission nobly, 
as the trustworthy guardians of souls, and who tower above the level of our 
corrupt epoch, as little islands above the morass. 

I cannot condemn the Church per se, and I would still feel unjustified 
in doing so if some depraved person in a priest’s robe commits some 
offence against moral law. Nor would I for a moment think of blaming the 
Church if one of its innumerable members betrays and besmirches his 
compatriots, especially not at a time when such conduct is quite common. 
We must not forget, particularly in our day, that for one such Ephialtes" 
there are a thousand whose hearts bleed in sympathy with their people 
during these years of misfortune, and who, together with the best of our 
nation, yearn for the hour when fortune will smile on us again. 

If it be objected thathere we are concerned not with the petty problems 
of everyday life but principally with fundamental truths and questions of 
dogma, the only way of answering that objection is to ask a question: 

Do you feel that fate has called you to:proclaim the truth to the world? 
If so, then go and do it. But have the courage to do it directly, and not use 


'3 Ephialtes of Trachis (ca. 480 BC) was an Athenian who betrayed his 
homeland to the Persians, thus helping them to win the Battle of Thermopylae. 


142 


CHAPTER 3 


some political party as your mouthpiece; for this is a swindle. For today’s 
evil, substitute your future good. 

But if you lack the courage, or if your good isn’t clear even to yourself, 
then leave the whole thing alone. But whatever happens, don’t try to reach 
the goal in the roundabout way of a political party if you aren’t brave 
enough to fight with your cap lifted. 

Political parties have no right to meddle in religious questions, except 
when these relate to something that is alien to the national well-being, and 
thus calculated to undermine racial customs and morals. 

If some Church dignitaries should misuse religious ceremonies or 
religious teaching to injure their own nation, their opponents should never 
take the same road and fight them with the same weapons. 

To a political leader, the religious teachings and practices of his people 
should be sacred and inviolable. Otherwise he shouldn’t be a statesman but 
a reformer—if he has the necessary qualities for such a task! 

Any other line of conduct will lead to disaster, especially in Germany. 

In studying the pan-German movement and its conflict with Rome, I 
was then firmly persuaded, and especially in the years to come, of the 
following conviction: By their failure to understand the importance of the 
social problem, the pan-Germanists lost the support of the broad masses, 
who are the indispensable combatants. By entering parliament, the pan- 
German leaders deprived themselves of the great driving force that resides 
in the masses, and also took on all the defects of the parliamentary 
institution. Their struggle against the Church made their position 
impossible in the lower and middle classes, while at the same time it robbed 
them of innumerable high-class elements—some of the best that the nation 
possessed. 

Thus the outcome of the Austrian Kulturkampf was practically nothing. 

Although they succeeded in winning 100,000 members away from the 
Church, that didn’t cause much harm. The Church didn’t really need to 
shed any tears over these lost sheep; it lost only those who had long ago 
ceased to belong to it in their hearts. The difference between this new 
reformation and the great Reformation was that, in the historic epoch of 
the great Reformation, some of the best members left the Church because 
of religious convictions. Whereas in this new reformation, only those left 
who had been indifferent before and were now influenced by political 
considerations. 

From the political point of view alone, the result was as laughable as 
it was deplorable. 


143 


MEIN KAMPF 


Once again, a political movement that had promised so much for the 
German nation collapsed, because it was not conducted in a spirit of 
unflinching adherence to naked reality, but rather became lost in fields 
where it was bound to disintegrate. 


3.25 CONCENTRATION ON A SINGLE ENEMY 


One thing is certainly true: 

The pan-German movement would never have made this mistake if it 
had properly understood the psyche of the broad masses. If the leaders had 
known that, for psychological reasons alone, one should never place two 
or more sets of adversaries before the masses—since that divides their 
fighting strength—they would have concentrated the full and undivided 
force of their attack against a single adversary. Nothing in the policy of a 
political party is so fraught with danger as to allow its decisions to be 
directed by those jack-of-all-trades who want everything, even though they 
don’t know how to do anything. 

But even though much can be said against the various religious 
denominations, political leaders mustn’t forget that the experience of 
history teaches us that no purely political party, in similar circumstances, 
ever successfully brought about a religious reformation. One doesn’t study 
history for the purpose of later forgetting or mistrusting its lessons. It would 
be a mistake to believe that in this particular case things were different, so 
that the eternal truths of history no longer applied. One learns history in 
order to be able to apply its lessons in the present day, and whoever fails to 
do this cannot pretend to be a political leader. In reality he is quite a 
superficial person or, as is mostly the case, a conceited simpleton whose 
good intentions cannot make up for his incompetence in practical affairs. 

The art of leadership, as displayed by all truly great popular leaders of 
history, consists in focusing the attention of the people against a single 
adversary, and ensuring that nothing will break it up. The more the militant 
energies of the people are directed towards one objective, the more will 
new recruits join the movement—attracted by the magnetism of its unified 
action. Therefore the striking power will be all the greater. The leader of 
genius must have the ability to make different opponents appear as if they 
belonged to one category. Otherwise, weak and wavering followers may 
easily begin to doubt the justice of their own cause, if they have to face 
different enemies. 


144 


CHAPTER 3 


As soon as the vacillating masses find themselves facing many 
enemies, their sense of objectivity will be aroused. They will ask how it is 
possible that all the others can be wrong, and that they themselves, and 
their movement, alone are right. 

Such a feeling would be the first step towards a paralysis of their own 
power. Hence it will always be necessary to group all opponents together, 
as forming one solid front, so that the mass of followers will see only one 
common enemy against whom they have to fight. Such uniformity 
intensifies their belief in the justice of their own cause, and strengthens 
their feeling of hostility towards the opponent. 

The pan-German movement was unsuccessful because the leaders 
didn’t grasp the significance of that truth. 

They clearly saw that the goal and their intentions were right; but they 
took the wrong road. It was like an Alpine climber who never loses sight 
of the peak he wants to reach, and who sets out with the greatest 
determination and energy, but pays no attention to the road beneath his feet. 
With his eye always fixed firmly on the goal, he overlooks the nature of 
the ascent, and finally he fails. 


3.26 THE WAY OF CHRISTIAN SOCIALISM 


The manner in which the great competitor of the Pan-German Party— 
the Christian Social Party—set out to attain its goal was quite different. 

The way it took was correct and well-chosen; but it didn’t have a clear 
vision of the goal. 

In almost all the matters where the pan-German movement failed, the 
policy of the Christian-Socialist Party was correct and systematic. 

They assessed the importance of the masses correctly, and thus they 
gained the support of large numbers by emphasizing the social character 
of the movement from the very start. By directing their appeal especially 
to the lower middle class and the artisans, they gained adherents who were 
faithful, enduring, and self-sacrificing. The Christian-Socialist leaders took 
care to avoid all controversy with the institutions of religion, and thus they 
secured the support of that mighty organization, the Catholic Church. Those 
leaders recognized the value of propaganda on a large scale, and they were 
veritable virtuosos in working up the spiritual instincts of the broad masses 
of their followers. 


145 


MEIN KAMPF 


3.27 ANTI-SEMITISM ON A RELIGIOUS BASIS 


The failure of this party to fulfill its dream of saving Austria from 
dissolution must be attributed to two main defects in the means they 
employed, and also the lack of clarity regarding the goal itself. 

First: The anti-Semitism of the new movement was based on religious 
instead of racial principles. The reason for this mistake gave rise to the 
second error also. 

The founders of the Christian-Socialist Party believed that they 
couldn’t base their position on the racial principle if they wished to save 
Austria, because they felt that a general disintegration of the state might 
quickly result. In the opinion of the party chiefs, the situation in Vienna 
demanded that all factors that tended to estrange the nationalities from one 
another should be carefully avoided, and that all factors making for unity 
should be encouraged. 

At that time, Vienna was so permeated with foreign elements, especially 
Czechs, that great tolerance was necessary if these elements were to be 
enlisted in any party that was not anti-German on principle. If Austria was 
to be saved, those elements were indispensable. And so attempts were made 
to win the support of the small traders—a great number of whom were 
Czechs—by combating liberal Manchesterism. And they believed that by 
adopting this attitude, they had found a slogan against Jewry that would 
unite all the different nationalities that made up the population of old Austria. 

It was obvious, however, that this kind of anti-Semitism didn’t upset 
the Jews very much, simply because it had a purely religious foundation. 
If worst came to worst, a few drops of baptismal water could always save 
the Jew and the business at the same time. 

On such superficial grounds, it was impossible to deal with the whole 
problem in a serious and rational way. The result was that many people 
couldn’t understand this kind of anti-Semitism, and therefore refused to join 
it. The attractive force of the idea was thus restricted exclusively to narrow- 
minded circles, because the leaders failed to go beyond the mere emotional 
appeal and didn’t ground their position on a truly rational basis. The 
intellectuals were opposed to such a policy on principle. It looked more and 
more as if the whole movement was a new attempt to convert the Jews or, 
on the other hand, as if it merely wished to compete with other movements. 

Thus the struggle lost all traces of having been organized for a higher 
spiritual mission. Indeed, it seemed to some people—and these were by no 
means the worst ones—to be immoral and reprehensible. The movement 


146 


CHAPTER 3 


failed to awaken a belief that this was a problem of vital importance for 
the whole of humanity, and that the destiny of the whole non-Jewish world 
depended on a solution. 

Through this half-hearted approach, the anti-Semitism of the Christian- 
Socialists tumed out to be worthless. 

It was a sham anti-Semitism—almost worse than none at all. The 
pretence gave rise to a false sense of security among people, who believed 
that the enemy had been taken by the ears. But in reality, the people 
themselves were being led by the nose. 

The Jew readily adapted to this form of anti-Semitism. In fact, its 
continuance was more beneficial to him than its absence would have been. 

This led to great sacrifices being made for the sake of that multi-national 
state; but much greater sacrifices were required by the German element. 

One didn’t dare to be a ‘nationalist,’ even in Vienna, lest the ground 
should fall away from under one’s feet. It was hoped that the Habsburg 
State might be saved by quietly avoiding the nationalist question; but this 
policy led that state to ruin. The same policy also led to the collapse of 
Christian Socialism, as this movement lost the only source of energy from 
which a political party can draw the necessary driving force. It became a 
party like any other. 


3.28 PAN-GERMANISM AND CHRISTIAN SOCIALISM 


During those years, I carefully followed the two movements and 
observed how they developed: the one, because my heart was with it, and 
the other because of my admiration for that remarkable man who then 
appeared to me as a bitter symbol of all Austrian-Germanism. 

When the imposing funeral procession of the dead mayor wound its 
way from city hall towards the Ring Strasse, I stood among the hundreds 
of thousands who watched it pass by. As I stood there, I felt deeply moved, 
and my instinct clearly told me that the work of this man was all in vain; a 
fatal destiny was inexorably leading this state to its downfall. If Dr. Karl 
Lueger had lived in Germany, he would have been ranked among the great 
leaders of our people. It was a misfortune for his work, and for himself, 
that he had to live in this impossible state. 

When he died, a fire had already been kindled in the Balkans, and it 
was spreading month by month. Fate was merciful in sparing him the sight 
of that which, even to the end, he had hoped to prevent. 


147 


MEIN KAMPF 


I tried to analyze the cause that rendered the one movement futile, and 
wrecked the progress of the other. The outcome was the profound 
conviction that, apart from the inherent impossibility of bolstering the 
position of the state in old Austria, the two parties made the following fatal 
mistake: 

The Pan-German Party was perfectly right in its fundamental ideas 
regarding its aim, which was to bring about a German renaissance. But it 
was unfortunate in its choice of means. It was nationalist, but unfortunately 
it was not socialistic enought to gain the support of the masses. Its anti- 
Semitic policy, however, was grounded on a correct perception of the 
significance of race and not on religious principles. But its struggle against 
one of the religious denominations was tactically false. 

The Christian-Social movement had only a vague concept of a German 
revival, but it was intelligent and fortunate in its choice of means to. The 
Christian-Socialists grasped the significance of the social question, but they 
had wrong ideas in the struggle against Jewry, and had no sense of the 
power of the nationalistic idea. 

If only the Christian-Socialist Party, together with its shrewd judgment 
of the worth of the popular masses, had rightly judged the importance of 
the racial problem—as the pan-German movement did—and if this party 
had been really nationalist, then a movement would have developed that, 
in my opinion, might have successfully altered the course of German 
destiny. Or if the pan-German leaders, on the other hand, in addition to 
their correct judgment of the Jewish question and of the national idea, had 
adopted the practical wisdom of the Christian-Socialist Party—and 
particularly their attitude towards socialism—the same might have 
happened. 

If things didn’t turn out this way, the fault primarily lay in the nature 
of the Austrian State. 

No other party then in existence supported my convictions, and so I 
couldn’t bring myself to enlist as a member in any of them, or even lend a 
hand in their struggle. Even at that time, all those organizations seemed to 
be already exhausted in their energies, and were therefore incapable of 
bringing about a national revival of the German people ina really profound 
way, rather than in a merely superficial way. 


148 


CHAPTER 3 


3.29 GROWING AVERSION TO THE HABSBURG STATE 


My inner aversion to the Habsburg State was steadily increasing. 

The more I paid special attention to questions of foreign policy, the 
more my conviction grew that this state would surely bring misfortune on 
the Germans. I realized more and more that the destiny of the German 
nation couldn’t be decisively influenced from here, but only in the German 
Reich itself. And this was true not only in regard to general political 
questions but also—and to an equal degree—regarding the whole sphere 
of cultural life. 

Here too, in all matters affecting national culture and art, the Austrian 
State showed all the signs of degeneration—or at least, of ceasing to be of 
any consequence to the German nation. This was especially true of its 
architecture. The new architecture couldn’t produce any great results in 
Austria because, since the building of the Ring Strasse, architectural 
activities—at least in Vienna—became insignificant when compared with 
the progressive plans arising in Germany. 

And so I came, more and more, to lead a double life. Reason and reality 
told me to continue my harsh but beneficial apprenticeship in Austria. But 
my heart was elsewhere. 

A growing sense of discontentment made me depressed, the more that 
I came to realize the inner hollowness of this state, and the impossibility 
of saving it from collapse. At the same time, I felt perfectly certain that it 
would bring nothing but misfortune to the German people. 

I was convinced that the Habsburg State would hinder and oppress 
every German who might show signs of real greatness—while at the same 
time, it would aid and abet every non-German activity. I was repelled by 
the conglomeration of heterogeneous races that the capital of the Dual 
Monarchy showed me: this motley crew of Czechs, Poles, Hungarians, 
Ruthenians, Serbs, and Croats, etc. And above all, that eternal fungus of 
humanity—Jews and more Jews. 

The giant city seemed to be the incarnation of racial depravity. 

The German vernacular of my youth was the local idiom of Lower 
Bavaria. I never forgot that particular style of speech, and I never learned 
the Viennese dialect. The longer I lived there, the stronger became my 
hatred for the mixture of foreign peoples that had begun to erode that 
ancient ground of German culture. 

The idea that this state could maintain its existence much longer was 
quite laughable. 


149 


MEIN KAMPF 


Austria was then like an ancient mosaic, one in which the cohesive 
cement had dried up and become old and crumbly. As long as it remains 
untouched, it may hold together and continue to exist. But the moment 
some blow is struck, it then breaks up into a thousand fragments. The 
question was only when the blow would come. 

Because my heart was always with the German Reich and not the 
Austrian monarchy, the hour of Austria’s dissolution as a state appeared as 
only the first step towards the emancipation of the German nation. 


3.30 THE SCHOOL OF MY LIFE 


All these considerations intensified my desire to go to that country that 
my heart had been secretly longing for, since the days of my youth. 

I hoped someday to make my mark as an architect, and that I could 
devote my talents to the service of my country on a large or small scale, 
according to the will of fate. 

But finally I wanted to enjoy the happiness of living and working in 
the land from which the movement that I had always longed for would be 
launched: namely, the union of my beloved homeland with our common 
fatherland, the German Reich. 

There are many who may not understand how such a yearning can be 
so strong. But I appeal especially to two groups of people. The first includes 
all those who are still denied the happiness I have spoken of; and the second 
embraces those who once enjoyed that happiness but had it cruelly torn 
from them. I turn to all those who have been torn from their motherland, 
who have to struggle for the preservation of their sacred language, and who 
are persecuted and harried because of their loyalty and love for the 
homeland. To such people I address my words, and I know: they will 
understand me! 

Only he who has experienced in his inner being what it means to be 
German, and yet denied the right of belonging to his fatherland, can 
appreciate the profound longing caused by enforced exile. It’s an eternal 
heartache; and there’s no place for joy and contentment until the doors of 
the paternal home are thrown open, and all those of kindred blood find 
peace and tranquility in their common Reich. 

Vienna was and remains the hardest, though most profound, school of 
my life. I was scarcely more than a boy when I came to live there, and when 
I left it, I had grown to be a grave and thoughtful man. In Vienna I acquired 


150 


CHAPTER 3 


the foundations of a worldview, and I developed a faculty for analyzing 
political questions in particular. That worldview and the political ideas then 
formed have never been abandoned—though they were later expanded 
upon in certain directions. Only now can I fully appreciate how valuable 
those years of study were for me. 

That’s why I have given a detailed account of this period. There, in 
Vienna, stark reality taught me the truths that now form the fundamental 
principles of the party that, within the course of five years, has grown from 
modest beginnings to a great mass movement. I don’t know what my 
attitude towards Jewry, Social Democracy, even more to Marxism in 
general, to the social problem, etc., would be today, if I hadn’t acquired a 
stock of personal beliefs at such an early age, under the duress of fate— 
and by my own hard study. 

For, although the misfortunes of the Fatherland may have stimulated 
many thousands to ponder over the inner causes of the collapse, that 
couldn’t lead to such a thorough knowledge and deep insight as a man may 
develop, who has fought a hard struggle for many years so that he might 
be the master of his own destiny. 


151 


CHAPTER 4: 
MUNICH 


Finally I came to Munich, in the spring of 1912.! 

The city itself was as familiar to me as if] had lived there for years. 
This was because my architectural studies had been constantly turning my 
attention to the metropolis of German art. One must know Munich if one 
would know Germany, and it’s impossible to acquire a knowledge of 
German art without seeing Munich. 

In any case, this period was by far the happiest and most contented 
time of my life. My earnings were very meager. But after all, I didn’t live 
for the sake of painting; I painted in order to get the bare necessities of life 
while I continued my studies. I was firmly convinced that I would finally 
succeed in reaching the goal I set for myself. And this conviction alone was 
strong enough to enable me to bear the petty hardships of everyday life 
without worrying too much about them. 

Moreover, almost from the very first moment of my sojourn there, I 
came to love that city more than any other place I had known. A German 
city! How different from Vienna! It was with a feeling of disgust that I 
recalled that Babylon of races. I enjoyed the spoken language; the Munich 
idiom recalled the days of my youth, especially when I spoke with those 
who had come to Munich from Lower Bavaria. There were a thousand or 
more things that I truly loved, or came to love, during the course of my 
stay. But what attracted me most was the marvelous marriage of native 
folk-energy with the fine artistic spirit of the city—that unique harmony 
from the Hofbraéuhaus to the Odeon, from the Oktoberfest to the 
Pinakothek, and so on.? Today I am more attached to this city than any 


' At age 23. 


? The Hofbrauhaus is a large, state-owned beer hall in central Munich; it was 
founded in 1589. The Odeon was a concert hall and ballroom, built in 1828. The 


153 


MEIN KAMPF 


other; it will remain inseparably connected to the development of my own 
career. My feelings of inner happiness and satisfaction with the place can 
be attributed to the charm of the Residence of the Wittelsbachs;? it has 
attracted probably everyone who is blessed with a feeling for beauty, as 
well as a calculating mind. 


4.1 GERMANY’S DEFECTIVE ALLIANCE POLICY 


Apart from my professional work, what most attracted me was the study 
of current political events—particularly those connected with foreign 
relations. I approached these by way of the German policy of alliances which, 
from my Austrian days, I had considered to be utterly mistaken. But in 
Vienna, I hadn’t yet seen quite clearly how deluded the German Empire had 
become. There I was inclined to assume—or probably I persuaded myself, 
as an excuse—that possibly the authorities in Berlin knew how weak and 
unreliable their ally would prove to be. But I thought that, for some strange 
reason, they refrained from making their opinions on this known. In reality, 
they believed that they should support the policy of alliances that Bismarck 
had initiated. They felt that a sudden break would be undesirable—if for no 
other reason than that it might arouse those foreign countries that were lying 
in wait for their chance, or might alarm the businessmen at home. 

But my contact with the people soon taught me, to my horror, that my 
assumptions were wrong. I was amazed to find everywhere, even in 
knowledgeable circles, that nobody had the slightest idea of the real 
character of the Habsburg monarchy. Especially among the common people, 
there was a prevalent illusion that the Austrian ally was a true power—one 
that would have to be seriously reckoned with, and would rally its people 
in the hour of need. The masses continued to look upon the Dual Monarchy 
as a ‘German’ state. They believed that it was dependable. They assumed 
that its strength could be measured by the millions of its subjects, as was 
the case in Germany. But first of all, they didn’t realize that Austria had 
ceased to be a German state. And secondly, that the prevailing conditions in 
the Austrian Empire were steadily pushing it toward disintegration. 


Pinakothek is the main art museum of Munich, dating originally from 1836. 


3 The Wittelsbachs are a famous Bavarian royal family, having ruled in the 
region since the year 1200. 


154 


CHAPTER 4 


I knew then the state of affairs in Austria better than the so-called 
diplomats. They stumbled along, nearly always blindly, on their way to 
disaster. The prevailing opinions among most people reflected only what had 
been drummed into them from above. And the higher authorities groveled 
before the ‘ally,’ as though bowing down before the Golden Calf. They 
probably thought that by being polite and amiable, they might offset the lack 
of honesty on the other side. Thus they took every declaration at face value. 

Even while in Vienna, I was repeatedly annoyed by the discrepancy 
between the speeches of the official statesmen and the contents of the 
Viennese press. And yet Vienna was still a German city—at least on the 
surface. But it was an utterly different state of affairs on leaving Vienna— 
or rather German-Austria—and coming into the Slav provinces! Only a 
glance at the Prague newspapers was needed to see how the whole exalted 
hocus-pocus of the Triple Alliance was judged from there.‘ In Prague, there 
was nothing but gibes and sneers for that ‘masterpiece of statesmanship.’ 
Even in times of peace, when the two emperors kissed each other on the 
brow in token friendship, those papers didn’t hide their belief that the 
alliance would be finished the moment an attempt was made to bring it 
down from the shimmering glory of a Nibelungen ideal to practical reality. 

Great indignation was aroused a few years later, when the alliances 
were put to the first practical test. Italy not only withdrew from the Triple 
Alliance—leaving the other two on their own—but she even joined their 
enemies! That anyone would believe, even for a moment, in the possibility 
of such a miracle as Italy fighting on the same side as Austria is simply 
incredible to anyone—at least, who didn’t suffer from diplomatic blindness. 
And that was just how people felt in Austria too. 

In Austria, only the Habsburgs and the German-Austrians supported 
the alliance. The Habsburgs did so from shrewd calculation of their own 
self-interests, and necessity. The Germans did it out of good faith and 
political—stupidity. They acted in good faith, inasmuch as they believed 
that by establishing the Triple Alliance they were doing a great service to 
the German Reich and were thus helping to defend it. They showed their 
political stupidity, however, in holding such ideas, because, instead of 
helping the Reich they really chained itto a moribund state that might drag 
its partner to the grave. And above all, by championing this alliance they 
fell more and more prey to the Habsburg policy of de-Germanization. 


4 The Triple Alliance was a pact between Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. 
It was formed in 1882 and survived until the start of WWI. 


155 


MEIN KAMPF 


The alliance gave the Habsburgs good grounds for believing that the 
German Reich wouldn’t interfere in their domestic affairs, and thus they 
were in a position to carry out, with more ease and less risk, their domestic 
policy of gradually eliminating the German element. Not only could the 
‘objectiveness’ of the German government be counted on, and thus there 
need be no fear of protest from that quarter, but one could always remind 
the German-Austrians of the alliance. This would silence them in case they 
might ever object to the reprehensible Slavization. 

But what could the German-Austrians do, when the people of the 
German Reich itself had openly proclaimed their trust and confidence in 
the Habsburg government? Should they resist, and thus be openly branded 
as traitors before their own people? They, who for so many decades had 
sacrificed so much for the sake of their German tradition? 

What would be the value of the alliance, once the influence of the 
Germans in Austria had been rooted out? If the Triple Alliance were to be 
advantageous to Germany, wasn’t it necessary that the predominance of 
the Germans in Austria be maintained? Or did anyone really believe that 
Germany could continue to be an ally of a Slavic Habsburg Empire? 

The official attitude of German diplomacy, as well as that of the general 
public towards internal problems affecting the Austrian nationalities, was 
not merely stupid; it was simply insane! On the alliance, as if a solid 
foundation, they grounded the security and future existence of a nation of 
70 million. At the same time, they allowed their partner to continue its 
policy of methodically undermining the sole foundation of that alliance. 
The day was bound to come when nothing but a ‘contract’ with Viennese 
diplomats would be left. The alliance itself would be lost to Germany. 

Concerning Italy, such had been the case from the beginning. 

If people in Germany had studied the history and psychology of nations a 
bit more carefully, not one of them could have believed for a minute that the 
Quirinal and the Viennese Hofburg could ever stand together on a common 
battle front. Italy would haveexploded like a volcano if any Italian government 
had dared to send a single Italian soldier to the battlefield with the Habsburg 
State—except as an enemy. More than once in Vienna, I witnessed the 
contempt and profound hatred that ‘allied’ the Italian to the Austrian State. The 
crimes that the House of Habsburg committed against Italian freedom and 
independence during several centuries were too grave to be forgiven, even with 
the best of goodwill. But this goodwill didn’t exist, either among the rank and 
file of the population or in the government. Therefore, for Italy, there were only 
two ways of co-existing with Austria: alliance or war. 


156 


CHAPTER 4 


By choosing the first, the Italians could leisurely prepare for the second. 

Especially since relations between Russia and Austria tended more and 
more towards military conflict, the German policy of alliances was as 
senseless as it was dangerous. 

Here was a classic case that demonstrated the lack of any broad or 
logical lines of thinking. 

But what was the reason for forming the alliance at all? It must have 
been the wish to better secure the future of the Reich, than if it were to 
depend exclusively on its own resources. But ‘the future of the Reich’ could 
mean only the matter of securing the means of existence for the German 
people. 


4.2 THE FOUR PATHS OF GERMAN POLICY » 


Therefore the only questions were the following: What form will the 
life of the nation take in the near future? And by what means can the 
necessary foundation and security be guaranteed, within the framework of 
the general power distribution among the European nations? 

A clear analysis of the principles on which the foreign policy of 
German statecraft were to be based should have led to the following 
conclusions: 

The annual population increase in Germany amounts to almost 900,000 
souls. The difficulties of feeding this army of new citizens must grow from 
year to year, and must finally lead to a catastrophe, unless ways and means 
are found to forestall the danger of misery and hunger. 

There were four ways of avoiding this terrible future calamity: 

(1) It was possible to follow the French example and artificially restrict 
the number of births, thus avoiding an excess of population. 

Nature herself—in periods of distress or under bad climatic condition, 
or if the soil becomes depleted—tends to restrict the increase of population 
among certain countries and races. And her method is quite as ruthless as 
it is wise. It doesn’t impede the procreative faculty per se; but it does restrict 
the further existence of the offspring by submitting them to such tests and 
privations that everything that is less strong, or less healthy, is forced to 
retreat into the bosom of the unknown. Whatever survives these hardships 
of existence has been tested and tried a thousand-fold; it is hardened, and 
rendered fit to continue the process of procreation. Hence the same 
thorough selection will begin all over again. By thus dealing brutally with 


157 


MEIN KAMPF 


the individual, and recalling him the very moment he shows that he is not 
fit for the trials of life, nature preserves the strength of the race and the 
species; she raises it to the highest degree of efficiency. 

A decrease in numbers therefore implies an increase in strength of the 
individual, and in this way the species is invigorated. 

But the case is different when man himself starts to restrict his own 
numbers. Man is not carved from the same wood as nature; he is ‘humane.’ 
He thinks he knows better than the ruthless Queen of Wisdom. He doesn’t 
impede the preservation of lesser individuals, but prevents procreation 
itself. To the individual, who always sees only himself and not the race, 
this approach seems more humane and more justified than the opposite 
way. But unfortunately, the consequences are also the opposite: 

By leaving the process of procreation unchecked, and by submitting 
the individual to the hardest tests in life, nature selects the best from an 
abundance of individuals; she stamps them as fit to live and carry on the 
conservation of the species. But man, when he restricts the procreative 
faculty, obstinately works to keep alive all who have been born. This 
‘correction’ of the Divine Will seems to him to be wise and humane; he 
rejoices at having trumped nature’s card—in one game at least—and thus 
‘proves’ that she is inadequate. The dear little ape of an all-mighty Father 
is delighted to see that he has succeeded in reducing human numbers. But 
he would be very upset to hear that his system brings about a degeneration 
in personal value. 

As soon as the procreative faculty is thwarted and the number of births 
diminished, the natural struggle for existence, which allows only healthy 
and strong individuals to survive, is replaced by a sheer desire to ‘save’ 
feeble and even diseased ones at any cost. And thus the seeds are sown for 
a human progeny that will become more and more deplorable from one 
generation to another, as long as nature’s will is scorned. 

And if that policy is carried out, the final results must be that such a 
nation will eventually terminate its own existence on this earth. Though 
man may defy the eternal laws of procreation for a little while, vengeance 
will sooner or later follow. A stronger race will oust that which has grown 
weak. The vital urge, in its ultimate form, will break all the absurd chains 
of this so-called humanitarianism for the individual, and will replace it with 
the humanity of nature—which destroys what is weak in order to make 
way for the strong. 

Any policy that aims at securing the existence of the German nation 
by restricting the birth-rate, robs that nation of its future. 


158 


CHAPTER 4 


(2) There is a second solution, one that is frequently proposed and 
recommended in our own time: internal colonization. It’s a suggestion that 
is well-intended, but is misunderstood by most people. Thus it’s the source 
of an unimaginable amount of harm. 

Undoubtedly, the productivity of the soil can be increased somewhat; 
but only within defined limits, and not indefinitely. By increasing the 
productive powers of the soil, it will be possible to balance the effect of a 
surplus birth-rate in Germany for a short period of time, without running any 
danger of hunger. But we have to face the fact that the general life-demands 
are rising more quickly than even the birth rate. The need for food and 
clothing are becoming greater from year to year, and are disproportionate to 
those of our ancestors of, say, 100 years ago. It would, therefore, be crazy to 
argue that continuous increase in the productive powers of the soil will supply 
the needs for an increasing population. No; this is true up to a certain point 
only, for at least a portion of the increased productivity will be consumed by 
the growing demands caused by a steady rise in the standard of living. 

But even if these demands were restricted to the narrowest range 
possible, we would still reach a definite limit, one that is conditioned by 
the inherent nature of the soil itself. No matter how hard we work, we 
cannot increase agricultural production beyond this limit. 

Therefore, though we may postpone the time of distress, it will eventually 
arrive. First, there will be the recurrence of famine periods from time to time, 
after bad harvests, etc. The intervals between these famines will become 
shorter and shorter, the more the population increases. Finally, famine will 
disappear only in those rare years of plenty, when the granaries are full. And 
a time will ultimately come when, even in those years of plenty, there won’t 
be enough to go around. Hunger will dog the footsteps of the nation. Nature 
will then step in once more and select those who are to survive—or else man 
will help himself by artificially preventing his own increase, with all the fatal 
consequences for the race and species mentioned above. 

It may be objected here that, in one form or another, this future is in 
store for all mankind, and that the individual nation cannot escape the 
general fate. 

At first glance, this objection seems correct. But we have to take the 
following into account: 

The day will certainly come when the whole of mankind will be forced 
to restrict the growth of the human species, because there will be no further 
possibility of adjusting the productivity of the soil to the perpetual increase 
in population. Nature must then be allowed to use her own methods; or 


159 


MEIN KAMPF 


man may possibly take the task of regulation into his own hands and 
establish the necessary equilibrium, using better means than we have today. 
But then it will be a problem for all of mankind, whereas now only those 
races must suffer which no longer have the strength and daring to acquire 
sufficient soil to meet their needs. As things stand today, there are vast 
spaces uncultivated spaces all over the surface of the globe. Those spaces 
are only waiting to be used. And it’s quite certain that nature didn’t set those 
territories apart for any one nation or race; such land awaits the people who 
have the strength to acquire it and the diligence to cultivate it. 

Nature knows no political boundaries. She begins by establishing life 
on this globe, and then watches the free play of forces. Those who show 
the greatest courage and industry are the children nearest to her heart. They 
will be granted the sovereign right of existence. 

If a nation confines itself to internal colonization while other races are 
perpetually increasing their territories, that nation will be forced to restrict the 
growth of its population at a time when the others are increasing theirs. This 
situation must eventually arrive, and it will arrive sooner if the nation has a 
small territory. It is unfortunately true that, only too often, the best nations— 
or rather, the only really cultured nations, who are also the standard-bearers 
of human progress—have decided, in their blind pacifism, to refrain from the 
acquisition of new territory, and to be content with ‘internal’ colonization. But 
at the same time, inferior nations succeed in grabbing large spaces for 
colonization all over the globe. This must lead to the following result: 

Races that are culturally superior but less ruthless will be forced to 
restrict their increase, because of insufficient territory to support their 
population; less civilized races could increase indefinitely, owing to the 
vast territories at their disposal. In other words: Should that state of affairs 
continue, then the world will one day be possessed by that portion of 
mankind that is culturally inferior but more energetic. 

A time will come, even though in the distant future, when there can be 
only two alternatives: Either the world will be ruled according to our 
moder concept of democracy, in which case every decision will be in favor 
of the numerically larger races. Or the world will be governed by the law 
of the natural distribution of power—and then those nations will succeed 
who possess a more brutal will, and not the nations who have practiced 
self-restriction. 

No one can doubt that this world will one day be the scene of dreadful 
struggles for existence on the part of mankind. In the end, only the instinct 
of self-preservation will triumph. This so-called humanitarianism—which 


160 


CHAPTER 4 


connotes only a mixture of stupidity, cowardice, and self-conceit—will 
melt away like snow under a March sun. Man has become great through 
perpetual struggle. In perpetual peace, he must decline. 

For us Germans, the slogan ‘internal colonization’ is fatal because it 
encourages the belief that we have discovered a means that is in accordance 
with our innate pacifism, and that will enable us to work for our livelihood 
in a half-slumbering existence. If such a teaching were taken seriously by 
our people, it would mean the end of all effort to acquire our rightful place 
in the world. If the average German were convinced that he could ensure 
his life and future this way, it would mean the end of any attempt to take 
an active and fruitful role in sustaining the vital demands of his country. 
Should the nation adopt such an attitude, then any really useful foreign 
policy might be looked upon as dead and buried—together with all hope 
for the future of the German people. 

Once we understand these consequences, we can no longer consider it 
a mere accident the fact that, among those who propagate this dangerous 
mentality in our people, the Jew is always first in line. He knows well that 
his softies are ready to be the grateful victims of every swindle that 
promises them a gold-brick in the shape of a discovery that will enable 
them to outwit nature, and thus avoid the hard and inexorable struggle for 
existence—and finally that they may become lords of the earth, partly by 
working, partly by doing nothing, depending on how things ‘turn out.’ 

It cannot be too strongly emphasized that any German internal 
colonization must only serve to relieve social abuses. To carry out such a 
system, the most important preliminary measure would be to free the soil 
from the grip of the speculator. But such a system could never suffice to 
assure the future of the nation without acquiring new territory. 

If we adopt a different plan, we will soon arrive not only at the end of 
our soil, but also at the end of our strength. 

In conclusion, the following must be said: 

The limitation to a small area of land—inherent in internal colonization, 
and similar to the effect achieved by restricting procreation—leads to an 
exceptionally unfavorable military and political situation for the nation. 

The size of the national territory is a determining factor in the external 
security of a nation. The larger the territory that a people has at its disposal, 
the stronger are its national defenses. Military decisions against people living 
in a small area are more quickly and easily—and thus more completely and 
effectively—achieved, than against states that have large territories. 
Moreover, the size of a national territory is in itself a certain guarantee that 


161 


MEIN KAMPF 


an outside power will not hastily invade. In that case, the struggle would be 
long and exhausting before victory could be gained. The risk of assault 
would be great, and would not be undertaken without exceptional reasons. 
Hence the very size of a state furnishes a basis upon which national liberty 
and independence can be maintained with relative ease. Conversely, a state 
whose territory is small offers a natural temptation to the invader. 

Actually, so-called nationalist circles in the German Reich rejected 
those first two possibilities of establishing a balance between the increasing 
population and a fixed national territory. But the reasons given for that 
rejection were different from those just mentioned: It was mainly on the 
basis: of certain moral sentiments that a restricted birth rate was rejected. 
Proposals for internal colonization were indignantly refused because it was 
suspected that such a policy might mean an attack on the big landowners, 
and that this might be the forerunner of a general assault on the principle 
of private property. The form of the latter solution [i.e. internal 
colonization] perhaps justified the concerns of the big landowners. 

Overall, the resistance to the broad masses wasn’t very clever, and in 
any case didn’t go to the root of the problem. 

Only two further ways were left open in which work and bread could 
be secured for the increasing population. 

(3) Either it was possible to consider acquiring new territory, on which 
the excess of the increasing population could be settled each year; or else 

(4) Industry and commerce could be organized for export, and thus 
support the people by the increased financial surplus. 

In other words: Either territorial expansion, or a colonial and 
commercial policy. 

Both ways were considered, examined, recommended, and rejected, from 
various standpoints—and as a result, the last alternative was finally adopted. 

The sounder alternative, however, was undoubtedly the first [1.e. 
number (3)]. 


43 ACQUISITION OF NEW LAND 


The principle of acquiring new territory on which to settle the surplus 
population has many advantages to recommend it, especially if we look to 
the future.° 


> What follows is an elaboration of alternative (3), Hitler’s preferred choice. 


162 


CHAPTER 4 


In the first place, it’s impossible to overestimate the need to maintain 
a healthy peasant class, as the basis of the national community. Many of 
our present evils have their origin exclusively in the imbalance between 
urban and rural populations. A solid group of small- and mid-scale farmers 
has always been the best protection against social disease. Moreover, this 
is the only solution that guarantees the daily bread of a nation, within the 
framework of its domestic national economy. 

With this guaranteed, industry and commerce would recede from their 
present unhealthy position of dominance, and would take their due place 
in the economy, adjusting the balance between supply and demand. They 
would no longer constitute the basis of national subsistence, but would be 
supporting institutions. By fulfilling their proper role—to adjust the balance 
between national production and consumption—they allow the nation to 
be more or less free from foreign countries. This ensures the freedom and 
independence of the nation, especially in times of difficulty. _ 

Such a territorial policy, however, cannot be fulfilled in the Cameroons, 
but rather exclusively here in Europe. One must calmly and squarely face 
the truth that it certainly cannot be Divine Will to give 50 times as much land 
to one nation as to another. In the present case, one mustn’t allow existing 
political borders to distract attention from what should exist on the basis of 
eternal justice. If this earth has sufficient room for all, then we should have 
that share of the land that is absolutely necessary for our existence. 

But people will not do this willingly. Then the right of self-preservation 
comes into effect. And when attempts to settle the difficulty in an amicable 
way fail, then the fist must take by force. If our ancestors had based their 
political decisions on pacifist nonsense like our present generation does, 
we wouldn’t possess more than one-third of our present territory. And likely 
there would be no German nation to worry about its future in Europe. No— 
we owe the two Ostmarks of the Reich to the natural determination of our 
forefathers in their struggle for existence.° From this same policy arises our 
present inner strength, something that is based on the greatness of our state 
and national territory, and which alone has made it possible for us to persist. 

And there is still another reason why that solution would have been correct: 

Many contemporary European nations are like pyramids standing on 
their peaks. Their European territory is ridiculously small when compared 

-with the enormous overhead weight of their colonies, foreign trade, etc. 


6 The two Ostmarks are German-Austria and East Prussia. This latter is today a 
region covering parts of Poland, Russia, and Lithuania. 


163 


MEIN KAMPF 


One may say: apex in Europe, and the base all over the world—dquite 
different from the USA, which has its base on the American continent and 
touches the rest of the world only through its apex. This accounts for the 
incomparable inner strength of the USA and the corresponding weakness 
of most of the colonial European powers. 

England is no proof to the contrary, because a quick glance at the 
British Empire overlooks the whole Anglo-Saxon world. England cannot 
be compared with any other state in Europe, since it forms a vast 
community of language and culture together with the USA. 

Therefore the only possibility that Germany had to conduct a sound 
territorial policy was to acquire new territory in Europe itself. Colonies 
cannot serve this purpose, since they aren’t suited for large-scale European 
settlement. From the 19" century on, it was no longer possible to peacefully 
acquire such colonies. Therefore any attempt at such a colonial expansion 
would have meant an enormous military struggle. Thus it was more 
practical to undertake that military struggle for new territory in Europe, 
rather than to wage war for foreign acquisition. 

Such a decision naturally demands the nation’s undivided attention. A 
policy like this requires all available energy on the part of everyone 
concermed, and cannot be carried out by half-measures or hesitatingly. The 
political leadership of the German Reich should have been exclusively 
devoted to this goal. No step should have been taken other than one that 
served as a means to this end. It should have been clear that such a goal 
could only be reached by war; and this prospect should have been faced 
with calm and collected determination. 

All alliances should have been envisioned and judged only from this 
standpoint. If new territory were to be acquired in Europe, it should have 
been mainly at Russia’s expense. Once again, the new German Reich 
should have set out on the same road as was formerly traveled by the 
Teutonic Knights—this time to acquire soil for the German plow by means 
of the German sword, and thus provide the nation with its daily bread. 


4.4 WITH ENGLAND, AGAINST RUSSIA 


Such a policy, however, could have only one possible European ally: 
England. 

Only by alliance with England was it possible to safeguard the rear of 
the new German crusade. And the justification for undertaking such an 


164 


CHAPTER 4 


expedition was stronger than that of our forefathers. Not one of our pacifists 
refuses to eat the bread made from grain grown in the East; and yet the first 
plow here was ‘the sword’! 

No sacrifice should have been considered too great, in order to win 
England’s friendship. Colonial and naval ambitions should have been 
abandoned, and attempts to compete against British industries avoided. 

Only a clear and definite policy could achieve such a goal. This would 
involve renunciation of global trade and colonies, renunciation of a German 
navy, and a concentration of state military power on land forces. 

The result would have been a temporary limitation, but for the sake of 
a great and powerful future. 

There was a time when England might have reasoned with us, on such 
grounds. It would have understood that the problem of a steadily rising 
population would force Germany to look for a solution either within Europe— 
with the help of England—or without England, elsewhere in the world. 

This outlook was probably the chief reason why London tried to draw 
nearer to Germany at the tum of the century. For the first time, an attitude 
became evident that, in recent years, has displayed itself in a most tragic 
way. People were unhappy with the thought of having to pull England’s 
chestnuts out of the fire—as if there could ever be an alliance on any basis 
other than mutual benefit. Such a deal could have been made with England. 
British diplomats were still wise enough to know that an equivalent must 
be offered in reply to any such services rendered. 

Let’s suppose that our German foreign policy was managed astutely 
enough in 1904 to enable us to take the part that Japan played. We can 
scarcely measure the beneficial consequences for Germany. 

There would have been no ‘World War.’ 

Any bloodshed in 1904 would have been a tenth of that shed from 1914 
to 1918. 

And what a position Germany would hold in the world today! 


4.5 SOLUTION TO THE AUSTRIAN ALLIANCE 


In any case, the alliance with Austria was then an absurdity. 

This mummified state didn’t attach itself to Germany for the purpose 
of carrying out a war, but rather to maintain a perpetual state of peace— 
one that was to be exploited for the purpose of slowly but surely rooting 
out the German element in the Dual Monarchy. 


165 


MEIN KAMPF 


Another reason for the impossible nature of this alliance was that no 
one could expect such a state to take an active part in defending German 
national interests, given that it had insufficient strength to end de- 
Germanization within its own borders. If Germany herself was neither 
sufficiently motivated nor ruthless to deny that absurd Habsburg State the 
right to decide the destinies of 10 million Germans, surely it was out of the 
question to expect the Habsburg State to assist in any great and courageous 
German undertaking. The attitude of the old Reich towards the Austrian 
question could have been considered a test of its stamina in the struggle of 
national destinies. 

In any case, the policy of oppression against the German population in 
Austria should never have been allowed to continue and to strengthen year 
by year. The value of Austria as an ally could be determined only by 
preserving the German element there. 

But that path was not followed. 

Nothing was feared as much as war; and yet they were ultimately 
forced to confront it, at the most unfavorable moment. 

They wanted to flee from destiny, but it held them fast. They dreamt 
of maintaining world peace, but landed in a world war. 

And this was the most significant reason why the above-mentioned 
third alternative was not even considered. New territory could be gained 
only in the East; but this meant war, whereas they wanted peace at any cost. 
Previously, the slogan of German foreign policy was: Preserve the German 
nation at all costs. Now it was changed to: Maintain world peace at all 
costs. We know the outcome. 

I will return to this point in detail later on. 


4.6 ECONOMIC EXPANSION POLICY 


Meanwhile, there remained the fourth alternative: Industry and world 
trade, naval power and colonies. 

Such a development would certainly have been easier and more rapidly 
attainable. To colonize a territory is a slow process, often extending over 
centuries. Yet this fact is the source of its inner strength; it doesn’t happen 
through a sudden burst of enthusiasm, but rather through a gradual and 
enduring process of growth—one quite different from industrial progress, 
which can be expanded within a few years. Results are achieved, but they 
aren’t of lasting quality; rather, something frail, like a soap-bubble. It’s 


166 


CHAPTER 4 


much easier to quickly build a navy than to carry through the tough task of 
settling new lands with farmers and establishing farmsteads. But the former 
is more quickly destroyed than the latter. 

In adopting such a course, Germany must have known that it would 
eventually mean war, sooner or later. Only a child could believe those sweet 
and syrupy expressions of goodness: that peaceful intentions could get them 
their bananas through this ‘friendly competition between the nations,’ 
without ever having to fight for them. 

No. Once we had taken this path, England was bound to become our 
enemy. Naturally, it fit in nicely with our innocent assumptions. But still, 
it was absurd to become indignant at the fact that the day came when 
England took the liberty of opposing our peaceful activity with a violent 
and brutal self-interest. 

Naturally, we on our side would never have done such a thing. 


4.7 WITH RUSSIA, AGAINST ENGLAND 


If a European territorial policy against Russia was only possible with 
England as our ally, by contrast then, a policy of colonies and global trade 
could have been conducted only against England and with Russia. But then 
we would have to face the consequences—and above all, to abandon 
Austria as quickly as possible. 

Atthe turn of the century, the Austrian alliance had become a veritable 
absurdity from all points of view. 

But no one considered an alliance with Russia against England, any 
more than one with England against Russia. In either case, the final result 
would have been war. And an avoidance of war was the very point of the 
commercial and industrial policy. It was believed that the ‘peaceful, 
economic’ conquest of the world provided a method that would 
permanently replace a policy of violence. 

Occasionally, however, there were doubts about this principle, 
especially when some incomprehensible warnings came from England now 
and again. That was the reason why the [German] naval fleet was built. It 
wasn’t for attacking or destroying England but rather to defend the concept 
of ‘world peace’ and the ‘peaceful’ conquest of the world. Therefore this 
fleet was kept within modest limits—not only regarding the number and 
tonnage of the vessels but their armaments as well. The idea was to show 
the transparency of our peaceful intentions. 


167 


MEIN KAMPF 


Such talk about the ‘peaceful, economic’ conquest of the world was 
probably the greatest nonsense ever to be raised to the level of state policy. 
It became even more foolish when England was pointed out as a prime 
example of how it could be done. Our academic analyses of history and 
ideas have done irreparable harm; they offer a striking proof of how people 
‘learn’ history without understanding anything of it. 

In fact, England should have been looked upon as a convincing 
argument against the theory of such peaceful conquest. No nation prepared 
the way for its commercial conquests more brutally than England did, and 
none has defended such conquests more ruthlessly. Isn’t it typical of British 
statecraft that it knows how to use political power in order to gain economic 
advantages and, inversely, to tum economic conquests into political power? 
What an error it was to believe that England was too cowardly to spill its 
own blood for the purposes of economic expansion! 

The fact that England didn’t possess a national army proved nothing. 
It’s not the military of the moment that matters, but rather the will and 
determination to use whatever strength is available. England has always 
had the arms needed. It always fought with the weapons necessary for 
success. It sent mercenary troops to fight, when mercenaries sufficed. But 
it never hesitated to draw from the best blood of the nation when that was 
the only means. And in every case, the determination, the tenacity, and the 
ruthless pursuit of victory remained unchanged. 


4.8 GERMAN CARICATURE OF THE ENGLISHMAN 


But in Germany, the schools, the press, and the comic papers promoted 
an idea of the Englishman that was eventually bound to lead to the worst 
kind of self-deception. This absurdity slowly but persistently spread into 
every aspect of German life. The result was an undervaluation that cost us 
dearly. The delusion was so deep that the Englishman was looked upon as 
a shrewd businessman, but personally as an unbelievable coward. 

Unfortunately, our lofty history professors didn’t impress their 
students with the truth that it’s impossible to build up such a mighty 
organization as the British Empire by mere swindle and fraud. The few 
who called attention to that truth were either ignored or silenced. I can 
vividly recall the astonished looks of my comrades when they found 
themselves face to face, for the first time, with the Tommies in Flanders. 
After a few days of fighting, it slowly dawned on our soldiers that those 


168 


CHAPTER 4 


Scotsmen were not like the ones described in the comic papers and press 
communiqués. 

It was then that I formed my first ideas of the effectiveness of various 
forms of propaganda. 

Such a falsification, however, served a good purpose for those who 
fabricated it: This caricature of the Englishman, though false, could be used 
to prove the possibility of global economic conquest. If the Englishman 
succeeded, we could too. And our greater honesty, and our freedom from 
that specifically-English ‘perfidy,’ would be assets on our side. It was 
thereby hoped that the sympathy of the smaller nations—and the 
confidence of the larger—could be gained more easily. 

We didn’t realize that our honesty was an object of profound aversion 
for other people, because we ourselves believed in it. The rest of the world 
looked on our behavior as a kind of shrewd deceitfulness. But when the 
Revolution came, then they were amazed at the boundless stupidity of our 
‘honest’ intentions.’ 


4.9 INNER WEAKNESS OF THE TRIPLE ALLIANCE 


Once we understand that absurd notion of ‘peaceful economic 
conquest’ of the world, we can more clearly understand that other absurdity, 
the Triple Alliance. With what other state could we have made an alliance? 
With Austria, we couldn’t acquire new territory by military means, even in 
Europe. And this very fact was the real reason for the inner weakness of 
the Triple Alliance. A Bismarck could permit himself such a makeshift 
alliance to meet temporary needs, but certainly none of his bungling 
successors could do so—and least of all when the original conditions no 
longer existed. In Bismarck’s time, Austria could still be looked upon as a 
German State. But the gradual introduction of universal suffrage turned the 
country into a non-German mishmash, one in which the German voice was 
scarcely heard. 

From the standpoint of racial policy, the Austrian alliance was simply 
disastrous. A new, great Slavic power was allowed to grow up close to the 
borders of the German Reich. Later on, this power was bound to take an 
entirely different attitude toward Germany than, say, Russia. The Alliance 


7 Hitler refers to the November Revolution of 1918—a tragic event of major 
historical importance, in his eyes. It is elaborated in Chapter 7. 


169 


MEIN KAMPF 


was thus bound to become emptier and feebler, because its only supporters 
were losing their influence and were being systematically pushed out of 
the more important public offices. 

By the tum of the century, the alliance with Austria had already entered 
the same phase as Austria’s alliance with Italy. 

Here, too, there were just two possibilities: Either to take the side of 
the Habsburg Monarchy or to raise a protest against the oppression of the 
German element in Austria. But generally speaking, when one takes such 
a course, it’s eventually bound to lead to open war. 

Even psychologically, the Triple Alliance became weaker as long as 
its main objective was a defense of the status quo. Conversely, an alliance 
becomes stronger the more the parties involved see it as a means to 
territorial expansion. Here, as everywhere else, strength lies not in defense, 
but in attack. 


4.10 LUDENDORFF’S 1912 MEMORANDUM 


This truth was recognized in various quarters, but unfortunately, not 
by the so-called ‘authorities.’ As early as 1912, Ludendorff*—who was 
then colonel and an officer of the general staff—pointed out these 
weaknesses of the Alliance in a memorandum that he drew up. But of 
course, none of the ‘statesmen’ attached any importance or value to that it. 
In general, this seems to be due to the fact that common sense, which is 
active in ordinary people, is entirely lacking when it comes to those known 
as ‘diplomats.’ 

It was lucky for Germany that the war of 1914 broke out indirectly, 
through Austria; therefore, the Habsburgs were compelled to participate. 
Had it been otherwise, Germany would have been left to her own resources. 
The Habsburg State would have been neither ready nor willing to enter a 
war of which Germany was responsible. That which was so shameful in 
the case of Italy would, in the case of Austria, have happened earlier. In 
other words, Austria would have remained ‘neutral’ in order to safeguard 
against any revolution that might begin immediately after the war had 
started. The Slavs would rather have smashed the Dual Monarchy than 
come to Germany’s assistance. 

8 Erich Ludendorff (1865-1937) was a leading German general during World 


War I. He was an early supporter of Hitler’s, and participated with him in the 
failed putsch of 1923. 


170 


CHAPTER 4 


4.11 AUSTRIA AS A TEMPTING LEGACY 


But at that time, there were only a few who understood all the dangers 
and aggravations that resulted from the alliance with the Danubian Monarchy. 

In the first place, Austria had too many enemies who were eagerly 
looking forward to obtaining the legacy of that decrepit state. These people 
came to have a certain hatred of Germany because it held the monarchy 
together. Thus the idea emerged that Vienna could be reached only by 
passing through Berlin. 

In the second place, Germany thus lost its best and most promising 
chances of other alliances. In their place, one now observed a growing 
tension in relations with Russia and even Italy. And this, despite a generally 
pro-German, anti-Austrian mood in Rome—a mood that slept in the heart 
of every Italian, flaring up now and then. 

Since the adoption of a commercial and industrial policy, there was no 
longer a basis for war against Russia. Only the common enemies of these 
two countries, Germany and Russia, could have an active interest in such 
a war. As a matter of fact, it was only the Jews and the Marxists who tried 
to stir up bad blood between the two states. 

In the third place, the Alliance constituted a permanent danger to 
German security. Any great power that was hostile to Bismarck’s Reich 
could mobilize many other states in a war against Germany, simply by 
promising them tempting spoils at the expense of the Austrian ally. 

It was possible to arouse the whole of Eastern Europe against the 
monarchy—especially Russia and Italy. The world coalition that developed 
under the leadership of King Edward could never have become a reality, if 
Germany’s ally, Austria, hadn’t offered such an alluring prospect. This fact 
alone made it possible to combine so many heterogeneous states, with 
divergent interests, into a single offensive front. Every member could hope 
to enrich himself at the expense of Austria, if he joined in the general attack 
against Germany. The fact that Turkey was also a tacit party to the unfortunate 
alliance with Austria enhanced Germany’s peril to an extraordinary degree. 

International Jewish world finance needed this bait of the Austrian 
legacy in order to carry out its plans of ruining Germany, which thus far 
hadn’t surrendered to the global superstate of finance and economics. Thus 
it was possible to consolidate that coalition and make it strong enough and 
brave enough—through the sheer weight of numbers—to join in physical 
conflict with the horned Siegfried.° 


? In the Song of the Niebelungs, the Germanic warrior Siegfried kills a dragon. 
Bathing in its blood, his skin becomes dragon-like and ‘homed,’ and thus invincible. 


171 


MEIN KAMPF 


The alliance with the Habsburg monarchy—which I loathed while still in 
Austria—was a matter of grave concem on my part. It caused me to meditate 
on it so persistently that finally I came to the conclusions I mentioned above. 

In the small circles that I frequented at that time, I didn’t hide my 
conviction that this sinister agreement with a state doomed to collapse 
would also bring catastrophe to Germany, if she didn’t free herself from it 
in time. I never once wavered in that firm conviction—even when the 
tempest of the World War seemed to have made a shipwreck of reasoning 
itself, and had put blind enthusiasm in its place, even among those circles 
where the coolest and hardest objective thinking should have held sway. 
In the trenches, I voiced and defended my own opinion whenever these 
problems came under discussion. I argued that abandoning the Habsburg 
monarchy would involve no sacrifice for Germany if it could thereby 
reduce the number of its own enemies. The millions of Germans who had 
donned the steel helmet had done so not to fight for the maintenance of a 
corrupt dynasty, but rather for the salvation of the German people. 

Before the war, there were a few occasions on which it seemed that at 
least one section of the German public had some slight misgivings about 
the political wisdom of the alliance policy. From time to time, German 
conservative circles issued warnings against being over-confident about 
the value of that alliance. But like every other reasonable suggestion of the 
time, it was thrown to the winds. The general conviction was that the right 
measures had been adopted to ‘conquer’ the world, and that the success 
would be enormous, and the sacrifices negligible. 

Once again, the ‘regular people’ could do nothing but watch how the 
‘authorities’ were marching straight towards disaster, and were enticing 
their beloved people to follow them, like the Pied Piper of Hamelin. 


4.12 STATE AND ECONOMY 


The deeper reasons why it was possible to foist upon the people this 
absurd notion of ‘peacefully conquering the world through commerce’ lay 
in the generally sick condition of the whole body of German political 
thought. This also shows how it was possible to put forth the maintenance ° 
of world peace as a national aim. 

The triumphant progress of technical science in Germany, and the 
marvelous development of German industries and commerce, led us to 


172 


CHAPTER 4 


forget that a powerful state was the necessary prerequisite of that success. 
On the contrary, certain circles went even so far as to promote the theory 
that the state owed its very existence to these phenomena—that it was, 
above all, an economic institution and should be structured according to 
economic interests. Therefore, it was held, the state was dependent on 
economic structure. This condition of things was praised as the healthiest 
and most natural arrangement. 

But the truth is that the state, in itself, has nothing whatsoever to do 
with any definite economic conception or development. 

It’s not a collection of contracting parties within a defined and limited 
space, for the purpose of serving economic ends. The state is a community 
of living beings who have kindred physical and spiritual natures. It’s 
organized for the purpose of assuring the preservation of their own kind, 
and to help towards fulfilling those ends assigned by Providence. Therein, 
and therein alone, lay the purpose and meaning of a state. Economic activity 
is one of the many auxiliary means that are necessary for the attainment of 
those aims. But economic activity is never the origin or purpose of a state— 
except where it has been founded on a false and unnatural basis. 

And this alone explains why a state per se doesn’t necessarily need a 
certain delimited territory. This becomes necessary only among those 
people who are ready to carry on the struggle for existence by means of 
their own work. People who can sneak their way into the human body 
politic and, like parasites, make others work for them, can form a state 
without possessing any specific territory. This is chiefly applicable to that 
parasitic nation which, today more than ever, preys upon the honest portion 
of mankind: the Jews. 

The Jewish State has never been delimited in space. It has been spread 
all over the world, without any borders whatsoever, and has always been 
constituted by only one race. That’s why the Jews have always formed a 
State within the State.'? One of the most ingenious tricks ever devised has 


'0 This was a long-standing complaint against the Jews, going back at least to the 
German philosopher Johann Fichte. In 1793, he wrote, “Throughout almost all 
the countries of Europe there is spreading a mighty hostile state that is at 
perpetual war with all other states, and in many of them imposes fearful burdens 
on the citizens: it is the Jews. ... Do you not remember the state within the 
State? Does the thought not occur to you that if you give to the Jews, who are 
citizens of a state more solid and more powerful than any of yours, civil rights in 
your states, they will utterly crush the remainder of your citizens?” (cited in 
Poliakov 1965: 512). 


173 


MEIN KAMPF 


been to make this state sail under the flag of ‘religion,’ thus assuring it of 
the religious tolerance that Aryans are always ready to grant." But the 
Mosaic religion is really nothing else.than the doctrine of the preservation 
of the Jewish race. It therefore takes in all spheres of sociological, political, 
and economic knowledge that have any bearing on this function. 

The instinct for the preservation of one’s own species is the primary 
cause that leads to the formation of human communities. Hence the state 
is a racial organism, and not an economic organization. The difference 
between the two is so great as to be incomprehensible to our contemporary 
so-called ‘statesmen.’ That’s why they like to believe that the state may be 
constituted as an economic structure, whereas the truth is that it has always 
resulted from a will to preserve the species and the race. 

But these qualities always exist and operate through the heroic virtues, 
and have nothing to do with commercial egoism. The preservation of the 
species always presupposes that the individual is ready to sacrifice himself. 
Such is the meaning of the poet’s lines: 


Tf you do not stake your life, 
You will never win life for yourself.’ 


Individual sacrifice is necessary in order to ensure the preservation of 
the race. Hence, the most essential condition for the establishment and 
maintenance of a state is a certain feeling of solidarity, one grounded in an 
identity of character and species, and in a willingness to defend these at all 
costs. For a people with their own territory, this results in a development 
of the heroic virtues. With a parasitic people, it will develop the arts of 
subterfuge and malignant cruelty—unless these are intrinsic racial 
characteristics, in which case the varying political forms are only the 
outward manifestations of these qualities. 

At least in the beginning, the formation of a state can only result from 
a manifestation of the heroic qualities. And the people who fail in the 


'! This is Hitler’s first explicit mention of ‘Aryan’ in Mein Kampf. The word 
itself is ancient, dating back at least to the 6th century BC, when it simply meant 
‘Iranian.’ It was in widespread use in the 1850s, due in part to the work of 
French theorist Arthur de Gobineau. And it achieved considerable publicity in 
Germany in the early 1900s, thanks to such writers as Houston S. Chamberlain. 
Despite common belief, the word was not an invention of Hitler or the Nazis. 
Hitler elaborates extensively on Aryanism in Chapter 11. 


2 From Friedrich Schiller’s Wallenstein trilogy (1799). 
174 


CHAPTER 4 


struggle for existence—that is, those who become vassals and are thereby 
condemned to vanish—are those who do not display the heroic virtues, or 
who fall victim to the trickery of the parasites. And even in this latter case, 
the failure is not so much a lack of intelligence but rather of courage and 
determination—which then tries to conceal itself beneath a cloak of 
humanitarianism. 

The qualities that are employed for the foundation and preservation of 
a state have therefore little or nothing to do with economics. And this is 
clearly demonstrated by the fact that the inner strength of a state only very 
rarely coincides with its economic prosperity. On the contrary, there are 
many examples showing that such prosperity indicates the approaching 
decline of a state. If it were correct to attribute the foundation of human 
societies to economic forces, then the power of the state would be at its 
peak during periods of economic prosperity, and not vice versa. 

It is particularly difficult to understand how the belief that the state 
exists by virtue of economic forces could become accepted in a country 
that has given proof of the opposite, in every phase of its history. The 
history of Prussia shows, in a particularly clear and distinct way, that it’s 
not material qualities but rather ideal virtues alone that lead to the formation 
of a state. Only under the protection of those virtues can economic activities 
be developed; the latter will continue to flourish until a time comes when 
the creative political capacity declines. Then the economic structure will 
also break down—a phenomenon that’s happening now, in an alarming 
manner, before our eyes. The material interests of humanity can prosper 
only in the shadow of heroic virtues. As soon as they become the primary 
considerations of life, they destroy the basis of their own existence. 

Whenever German political power was particularly strong, the 
economic situation also improved. But whenever economic interests 
dominated the life of the people, and pushed transcendent ideals into the 
background, the state collapsed; and economic ruin followed soon 
thereafter. 

If we ask about those forces that are necessary for the creation and 
preservation of a state, we find them under one single heading: The capacity 
and readiness of the individual to sacrifice for the common welfare. That 
this has nothing at all to do with economics can be proved by observing 
the simple fact that man doesn’t sacrifice himself for material interests. In 
other words, he will die for an ideal, but not for a business. 

The marvelous English gift for public psychology was clearly shown 
in the way they presented their case in the World War. We were fighting 


175 


MEIN KAMPF 


for our bread; but the English declared that they were fighting for 
‘freedom’—and not even their own freedom. No—for the freedom of the 
small nations. The Germans laughed at this effrontery, and were angered 
by it. But in doing so, they showed how much political thought had 
declined among our so-called diplomats in Germany, even before the war. 
We didn’t have the slightest idea of the essence of that force that causes 
men to freely and willingly face their own death. 

As long as the German people, in 1914, continued to believe that they 
were fighting for ideals, they stood firm. As soon as they were told that they 
were fighting only for their daily bread, they began to give up the struggle. 

Our clever ‘statesmen’ were astounded at this change of attitude. They 
never understood that as soon as man is called upon to struggle for purely 
material causes, he’ll avoid death as best he can; clearly, death and the 
enjoyment of the material rewards are quite incompatible. The frailest woman 
will become a heroine when the life of her own child is at stake. And only 
the will to save the species and the hearth—or the state that protects them— 
has, in all ages, compelled men to face the weapons of their enemies. 

The following may be proclaimed as an eternal truth: 

A state has never arisen from peaceful economic means, but always 
from the instinct to maintain the species—whether this instinct manifest 
itself in the heroic sphere, or in that of cunning craftiness. In the first case, 
we have the Aryan states, based on the principles of work and culture. In 
the second case, we have the Jewish parasitic colonies. But as soon as 
economic interests begin to predominate over the instincts in a people or a 
state, the situation quickly leads to subjugation and oppression. 


4.13 THE MOMENT OF DECAY 


The belief that prevailed in Germany before the war—that the world 
could be opened up and even conquered for Germany through a system of 
peaceful commerce and a colonial policy—was a typical symptom that 
indicated the decline of those real qualities whereby states are created and 
preserved. It also showed the decline of the insight, will power, and 
practical determination that belong to those qualities. The penalty for this, 
like a law of nature, was the World War, with its attendant consequences. 

To anyone who hadn’t thought deeply about the matter, this general 
attitude of the German people must have seemed an insoluble enigma. After 
all, Germany itself was a magnificent example of an empire that had been 


176 


CHAPTER 4 


built up purely through a policy of power. Prussia, which was the generative 
cell of the German Reich, was created by brilliant heroic deeds, and not by 
financial or commercial operations. And the Reich itself was but the 
magnificent compensation for a leadership that conducted a policy of power 
and military valor. 

How then did it happen that the political instincts of this very same 
German people became so degenerate? It wasn’t merely one isolated 
phenomenon that pointed to this decadence, but morbid symptoms which 
appeared in alarming numbers all over the body politic, eating into the 
nation like a gangrenous ulcer. It seemed as if some all-pervading 
poisonous fluid had been injected, by some mysterious hand, into the 
bloodstream of this once heroic body—bringing abouta creeping paralysis 
that affected rationality and the basic instinct of self-preservation. 

During the years 1912-1914, I wondered endlessly about those 
problems that related to the policy of the Triple Alliance and the economic 
policy then being pursued by the German Reich. Once again, I came to the 
conclusion that the only explanation for this enigma lay in the operation of 
that force that I had already become acquainted with in Vienna, though 
from a different angle of vision: the Marxist doctrine and worldview, and 
its organized action throughout the nation. 


4.14 GERMANY’S ATTITUDE TOWARD MARXISM 


For the second time in my life, I plunged deep into the study of that 
destructive teaching. This time, however, I was driven not by the 
impressions and influences of daily life, but rather by observation of 
general phenomena in German political life. In delving again into the 
theoretical literature of this new world, and trying to get a clear view of 
the possible consequences of its teaching, I compared the theoretical 
principles of Marxism with the phenomena and events brought about by 
its activities in political, cultural, and economic life. 

For the first time in my life, I now tumed my attention to the efforts 
that were being made to subdue this world plague. 

I studied Bismarck’s exceptional legislation in its original concept, its 
operation, and its results. Gradually I formed a basis for my own opinions, 
one that has proved as solid as a rock; I have never since had to change my 
attitude towards the general problem. I also made a further and more 
thorough analysis of the relationship between Marxism and Jewry. 


177 


MEIN KAMPF 


Earlier in Vienna, I looked upon Germany as an imperturbable 
colossus. But even then, serious doubts and misgivings often disturbed me. 
In my own mind, and in my conversation with my small circle of 
acquaintances, I criticized Germany’s foreign policy and the incredibly 
superficial way in which it dealt with Marxism—though it was then the 
most important problem in Germany. I couldn’t understand how they could 
stumble blindfolded into the midst of this peril, the effects of which would 
be momentous, if Marxism’s openly declared aims were put into practice. 
Even then I warned people around me, just as I am warning a wider 
audience now, against that soothing but cowardly slogan: ‘Nothing can 
happen to us!’ A similar mental contagion had already destroyed a mighty 
empire. Could Germany hope to escape the operation of those laws that 
bind all other human communities? 

In the years 1913 and 1914, I expressed my opinion for the first time 
in various circles—now including some members of the National Socialist 
movement—that the question of securing the future of the German nation 
is the same as the question of destroying Marxism. 

I considered the disastrous policy of the Triple Alliance as one of the 
consequences resulting from the disintegrating effects of Marxist teaching. 
The truly alarming feature was that this teaching was invisibly corrupting 
the foundations of a healthy political and economic outlook. Those who 
became contaminated by it frequently didn’t realize that their aims and 
actions sprang from this worldview, which they otherwise openly rejected. 

The spiritual and moral decline of the German people had long since 
begun. And yet, those who were affected by the morbid decadence were 
frequently unaware—as often happens—of the forces that were destroying 
their very existence. Sometimes they tried to cure the disease by treating 
the symptoms, which were taken as the cause. But since no one recognized, 
or wanted to recognize, the real cause of the disease, this way of combating 
Marxism was as ineffective as bungling quackery. 


178 


CHAPTER 5: 
THE WORLD WAR 


During my boisterous youth, nothing dampened my wild spirits so 
much as the thought that I was born at a time when there would be no more 
temples of fame, except to honor businessmen and state officials. The 
historical tempest had subsided, and the future seemed to be given over to 
‘the peaceful competition of nations’—in other words, to a cozy mutual 
swindling match without the use of violence. Individual countries became 
commercial enterprises, grabbing customers and striving for concessions 
from each other. And it was all accompanied by loud but innocuous 
shouting. 

This trend seemed destined to steadily and permanently progress. It 
seemed bound to eventually transform the world into a giant department 
store. In the entryway of this emporium, there would be rows of busts of 
profiteers and sheepish governmental officials. The salesmen were 
represented by the English, and the administrative officials by the Germans. 
The Jews would be sacrificed to the position of ownership—-since, as they 
claim, they make no money and are always being called upon to ‘pay out.’ 
Moreover, they have the advantage of being versed in the foreign 
languages. 

I used to ask, Why wasn’t I born a hundred years ago? Perhaps around 
the time of the Wars of Liberation,’ when a man was still of some value, 
even though he had no ‘business’! 

Thus I thought of it as an ill-deserved stroke of bad luck that I had 
arrived too late on this earth. I was chagrined at the idea that my life would 
have to run its course along peaceful and orderly lines. As a boy, I was 
anything but a pacifist, and all attempts to make me so were futile. 


' Also known as the German Campaign of 1813. It liberated the German states 
from French control. 


179 


MEIN KAMPF 


Then came the Boer War, like a flash of lightning.” Day after day, I 
gazed intently at the newspapers, and I devoured the telegrams and 
communiqués. I was overjoyed at witnessing that heroic struggle, even 
from so great a distance. 

When the Russo-Japanese War came, I was older and better able to 
judge for myself.* For nationalistic reasons, I then took the side of the 
Japanese in our discussions. I looked upon the defeat of the Russians as a 
blow to Austrian Slavism. 

Many years have passed between that time and my arrival in Munich. 
I now realized that what I formerly believed to be a morbid decadence was 
only the lull before the storm. During my Vienna days, the Balkans were 
already in the grip of that sultry pause that precedes a violent storm. Flashes 
of lightning occasionally appeared; but they rapidly disappeared in the 
sinister gloom. Then the Balkan War broke out.’ The first gusts of the 
forthcoming tornado then swept across a highly-strung Europe. The 
intervening calm was an atmosphere of foreboding—so much so that the 
sense of an impending catastrophe was transformed into a feeling of 
anticipation. People wished that heaven would give free rein to a fate that 
could no longer be curbed. Then the first great bolt of lightning struck the 
earth. The storm broke, and a heavenly thunder intermingled with the roar 
of the cannons in the World War. 

When news reached Munich that the Archduke Franz Ferdinand had 
been murdered, I was at home all day and didn’t get the particulars of how 
it happened.’ At first I feared that the shots may have been fired by some 
German-Austrian students who had become furiously aroused by his pro- 
Slav activities, and wished to free the Germans from this internal enemy. 
It was easy to imagine what the result of such a mistake would have been: 
anew wave of persecution, all ‘justified’ and ‘explained’ to the world. But 
soon afterwards, I heard the names of the presumed assassins, and also that 
they were known to be Serbs. I was somewhat dumbfounded by the 
inscrutable vengeance that destiny had wrought. 

2 Formally, the “second” Boer War, which ran from 1899 to 1902. In this war, 
Britain reasserted its control over black South Africans. 

3 The Russo-Japanese War ran from 1904 to 1905, regarding territory in 
Manchuria. It ended in Japanese victory. 

4 The Balkan War was a two-phase offensive, over the years 1912 to 1913. The 
Balkan states defeated the Ottoman Empire, though it regained some ground in 
the latter phase of the conflict. 

5 On 28 June 1914. This event precipitated World War I. 


180 


CHAPTER 5 


The greatest friend of the Slavs fell victim to the bullets of Slavic: 
fanatics. 

Anyone observing the relationship between Austria and Serbia during 
the past few years could have no doubt: a stone had been set rolling, and it 
couldn’t be stopped. 


5.1 THE AUSTRIAN ULTIMATUM 


It is unjust to the Vienna government to blame it now for the form and 
content of the ultimatum it issued. In a similar position and under similar 
circumstances, no other world power would have acted otherwise. On her 
southern border, Austria had a relentless mortal foe who indulged in 
increasingly frequent acts of provocation. This action would not have 
ceased until the moment came for the destruction of the empire. In Austria, 
there was good reason to fear that this would occur, at the latest, with the 
death of the emperor. Once he was gone, it was unlikely that the monarchy 
could offer any serious resistance. For several years, the state had been so 
completely identified with the personality of Franz Joseph that, in the eyes 
of most people, the death of this venerable personality would be tantamount 
to the death of the empire itself. 

Indeed, it was one of the clever constructions of Slav policy to foster 
the impression that the Austrian State owed its very existence solely to the 
rare talents of that monarch. This kind of flattery was particularly 
welcomed at the Hofburg—all the more because it had no relation 
whatsoever to the real merits of the emperor. No effort whatsoever was 
made to locate the carefully hidden thorns within in this glorifying praise. 
One fact that was entirely overlooked, perhaps intentionally, was that the 
more the empire remained dependent on the so-called administrative talents 
of ‘the wisest monarch of all times,’ the more catastrophic the situation 
would be, when fate came knocking at the door and demanded payment. 

Was it even possible to imagine the Austrian Empire without its 
venerable ruler? 

Wouldn’t the tragedy that once befell Maria Theresa be repeated?® 

It’s an injustice to the circles of Viennese government to reproach them 
for having instigated a war that might have been prevented. The war was 


6 Maria Theresa (1717-1780) ruled Austria for the last 40 years of her life. The 
“tragedy” was apparently her loss of Silesia to Prussia in 1748. 


181 


MEIN KAMPF 


bound to come. Perhaps it might have been postponed for a year or two, at 
the most. But it was always the misfortune of German—and Austrian— 
diplomats that they endeavored to put off the inevitable day of reckoning, 
with the result that they were finally compelled to deliver their blow at a 
most inopportune moment. 

No. Those who didn’t want this war should have had the courage to 
take the consequences of the refusal, which must necessarily have meant 
the sacrifice of Austria. And even then, war would have come—not as a 
war of all nations against us, but in the form of a partition of the Habsburg 
monarchy. Then we would have had to decide either to join in, or to look 
on with folded arms, allowing fate to run its course. 

Those, however, who are loudest today in their denouncing of the war, 
and offering the sagest opinions, are the very same ones who contributed 
most fatally in steering us towards the war. 

For decades, the German Social Democrats were agitating, in an 
underhanded and knavish way, for war against Russia. At the same time, 
the German Center Party, with religious ends in view, worked to make the 
Austrian State the focal point of German policy. We now live with the 
consequences of this insanity. What came was bound to come—and it could 
never have been avoided. German guilt lay in the fact that it missed all 
opportunities for attack, simply to preserve the peace. It became entangled 
in an alliance for world peace, and thus became victim of an anti-German 
world coalition that was determined to bring about a world war. 

Even if the Vienna government had formulated its ultimatum in less 
drastic terms, that wouldn’t have changed the situation at all. But it 
certainly might have aroused public indignation. In the eyes of the great 
masses, the ultimatum was too moderate and certainly not excessive or 
brutal. Anyone who would deny this today is either a simpleton with a 
feeble memory, or else a deliberate liar. 

The War of 1914 was certainly not forced on the masses; for God’s 
sake, no. It was even desired by the whole people. 

There was a desire to bring the general feeling of uncertainty to an end, 
once and for all. And it’s only in this light that we can understand how more 
than two million German men and boys voluntarily joined the colors, ready 
to shed the last drop of their blood for the cause. 


182 


CHAPTERS 


5.2 THE GERMAN WAR FOR FREEDOM 


For me, these hours came as a deliverance from the distress that had 
weighed upon me during the days of my youth. I’m not ashamed to admit 
today that I was carried away by the enthusiasm of the moment. I sank 
down on my knees and thanked heaven, out of the fullness of my heart, for 
the good fortune of living at such a time. 

The fight for freedom had begun, on an unparalleled scale in world 
history. From the moment that fate took the helm, a conviction grew among 
the masses that now it wasn’t a question of deciding the destinies of Austria 
or Serbia, but that the very existence of the German nation itself was at stake. 

At last, after many years, the people clearly saw the future. Therefore, 
almost immediately after the gigantic struggle began, an excessive 
enthusiasm was replaced by a more earnest and more fitting undertone; the 
rapture of the popular spirit was not a mere passing frenzy. It was only too 
necessary that the gravity of the situation be recognized. At that time there 
was, generally speaking, not the slightest presentiment or conception of 
how long the war might last. People dreamed of the soldiers being home 
that winter, and that they would then resume their daily work in peace. 

Whatever a man wants is what he hopes for and believes in. The 
overwhelming majority of the people have long since tired of the perpetual 
insecurity in public affairs. Hence it was only natural that few anticipated 
a peaceful conclusion to the Austro-Serbian conflict; they looked forward 
to a definitive resolution. I, too, was one of these millions. 

The moment the news of the assassination reached Munich, two 
thoughts came into my mind: First, that war was absolutely inevitable; and 
second, that the Habsburg State would now be forced to honor its alliance. 
What I had most feared was that one day Germany itself, perhaps as a result 
of the alliance, would become involved in a conflict not directly caused by 
Austria. In this case, Austria might not be able to muster the will to fight 
on behalf of its ally. The Slavic majority in the empire would have 
immediately begun to undermine any such intentions, and would have 
always preferred to shatter the entire state rather than to aid its ally. But 
now this danger was removed. The old state was compelled to fight, 
whether it wished to or not. 

My own attitude towards the conflict was equally simple and clear. I 
believed that it wasn’t a case of Austria fighting to get satisfaction from 
Serbia, but rather a case of Germany fighting for her own existence—for 
the life or death of the German nation, for its freedom and for its future. 


183 


MEIN KAMPF 


Bismarck’s work must now be carried on. Young Germany must show itself 
worthy of the blood shed by our fathers on so many heroic battlefields, 
from Weissenburg to Sedan and Paris. And if this struggle should bring us 
victory, our people will again rank foremost among the great nations. Only 
then could the German Reich assert itself as the mighty champion of peace, 
without needing to restrict the daily bread of its children for the sake of 
maintaining the peace. 

As a boy and young man, I often wished for the occasion to prove that 
my national enthusiasm was no mere empty whim. Cheering sometimes 
seemed to me to be a kind of sinful indulgence, though I couldn’t give any 
justification for that feeling. After all, who has the right to shout a 
triumphant word if he hasn’t won the right to do so in a place where there 
is no play-acting, and where the Goddess of Destiny’s inexorable hand tests 
the truth and sincerity of nations and men? Just as millions of others, I felt 
a proud joy in being permitted to go through this test. I had so often sung 
Deutschland tiber Alles, and so often roared ‘Heil,’ that I now saw it as a 
kind of belated grace that I was allowed to appear before the Court of 
Eternal Justice, and to testify to the truth of those feelings. 

One thing was clear to me from the very beginning, namely, that in the 
event of war—which now seemed inevitable—my books would have to be 
set aside. I also realized that my place would have to be where my inner 
voice directed me. 

I left Austria principally for political reasons. Even more rational, 
however, was that, now that the war had begun, that I should put into 
practice the logical consequences of my political opinions! I had no desire 
to fight for the Habsburg cause, but I was prepared to die at any time for 
my own people and the Reich to which they belonged. 


5.3 ENLISTMENT IN A BAVARIAN REGIMENT 


On 3 August 1914, I presented an urgent petition to His Majesty, King 
Ludwig III, requesting to be allowed to serve in a Bavarian regiment. In 
those days, the chancellery certainly had its hands full, and I was therefore 
all the more pleased when I received an answer the next day. I opened the 
document with trembling hands; and no words could describe the joy that 
I felt on reading that I was instructed to report to a Bavarian regiment. 
Within a few days, I was wearing the uniform that I was not to take off 
again for nearly six years. 


184 


CHAPTER 5 


For me, as for every German, the most memorable period of my life 
now began. Face to face with that mighty struggle, everything past fell 
away into oblivion. I look back on those days with a wistful pride, 
especially because we are now approaching the tenth anniversary of that 
memorable event. I think back on those early weeks of war, when kind Fate 
allowed me to take my place in that heroic struggle among the nations. 

As I recall the scene, it seems like only yesterday. I see myself among 
my young comrades on our first parade drill, exercising, and so on, until at 
last the day came for us to march off. 

Like so many others, I had one worry during those days: that we might 
not reach the front in time. Again and again, that thought disturbed me; 
every announcement of a victorious battle left a slight bitter taste—which 
only increased as news of further victories arrived. 


5.4 BAPTISM BY FIRE 


At long last, the day came when we left Munich to fulfill our duty. For 
the first time in my life, I saw the Rhine; we journeyed westwards to stand 
guard before that historic German river, against its traditional and greedy 
enemy. As the first soft rays of the morning sun broke through the light 
mist, showing the Niederwald Statue,’ the whole transport train broke into 
strains of Die Wacht am Rhein. I felt as though my heart would burst. 

Then followed a damp, cold night in Flanders. We marched in silence 
throughout the night, and as the morning sun came through the mist, an 
iron greeting suddenly burst above our heads. Shrapnel exploded in our 
midst, spluttering in the damp ground. But before the smoke of the 
explosion disappeared, a wild ‘Hurrah’ arose from 200 throats, in response 
to this first greeting of death. Then began the whistling of bullets and the 
booming of cannons, the shouting and singing of the combatants. With eyes 
straining feverishly, we pressed forward, quicker and quicker, until we 
finally came to hand-to-hand combat—there beyond the beet-fields and 
meadows. Soon the strains of a song reached us from afar. Nearer and 
nearer, from company to company, it came. And while death began to 
wreak havoc in our ranks, we passed the song on to those beside us: 
Deutschland, Deutschland tiber Alles, tiber Alles in der Welt! 


7 The Niederwald Statue was begun in 1871 by Kaiser Wilhelm I, to 
commemorate the unification of Germany. It was dedicated in 1883. 


185 


MEIN KAMPF 


5.5 FROM YOUNG VOLUNTEER TO OLD SOLDIER 


After four days in the trenches, we came back. Even our step had 
changed. Boys of 17 now looked like men. 

The volunteers of the List Regiment may not have learned how to fight 
properly, but they knew how to die like old soldiers. 

That was the beginning. 

And thus we carried on from year to year. A feeling of horror replaced 
the romantic fighting spirit. Enthusiasm gradually cooled down, and 
exuberant spirits were quelled by the fear of ever-present death. A time came 
for each of us to experience the conflict between the urge to self-preservation 
and the call of duty. I, too, had to go through that conflict. As death 
unrelentingly sought its prey everywhere, a vague something rebelled within 
the body. It tried to pass as common sense; but in reality, it was fear. Fear 
took on this cloak in order to impose itself on the individual. Yet the more 
this voice called for caution, and the louder and more persistent its demands, 
the stronger our resistance became. Finally, the internal struggle was over, 
and the call of duty was triumphant. By the winter of 1915-1916, I had come 
through that inner struggle. My will had asserted its indisputable mastery. 

In the early days, I went into the fight with a cheer and a laugh. Now, 
however, I was calm and resolute. And that frame of mind endured. Fate 
could now put me to the final test without my nerves or reason giving way. 

The young volunteer had become an old soldier. 

This same transformation took place throughout the whole army. 
Constant fighting had aged, toughened, and hardened it, so that it stood 
firm and dauntless against every assault. 

Only now is it possible to judge that army. After two or three years of 
continuous fighting, and having been thrown into one battle after another, 
bravely facing superior numbers and superior armament, suffering hunger 
and privation, the time had come when one could assess the value of that 
singular fighting force. 

For a thousand years to come, no one will dare to speak of heroism 
without recalling the German Army of the World War. And then, from the 
dim past, there will emerge an immortal vision of those solid ranks of steel 
helmets that never flinched and never faltered. As long as Germans live, 
they will be proud to remember that these men were the sons of their 
people. 


186 


CHAPTER 5 


5.6 ARTIFICIAL DAMPENING OF ENTHUSIASM 


I was a soldier then, and didn’t really wish to meddle in politics—all 
the more so because the time was inopportune. I still believe that the 
humblest stable-boy of those days served his country better than the best 
of, let’s say, our ‘parliamentarians.’ My hatred for those big-mouths was 
never greater than in the days when all decent men, who had anything to 
say, said it point-blank to the enemy’s face; or else, failing this, kept their 
mouths shut and did their duty elsewhere. Yes, I hated all those politicians. 
And if had my way, I would have formed them into a labor battalion and 
given them the opportunity to babble amongst themselves all they liked, 
without offence or harm to decent people. 

In those days, I cared nothing for politics. But I couldn’t help forming 
an opinion on certain manifestations that affected not only the whole nation 
but also us soldiers in particular. 

There were two things that caused me the greatest anxiety at that time, 
and which I had come to regard as harmful. 

First: Shortly after our first series of victories, a certain section of the 
press already began to throw cold water, drip by drip, on public enthusiasm. 
At first this wasn’t obvious. It was done under the mask of good intentions 
and solicitude. The public was told that big victory celebrations were 
somewhat out of place, and weren’t worthy expressions of the spirit of a 
great nation. The fortitude and valor of German soldiers were accepted 
facts that didn’t necessarily call for celebration. Furthermore, foreign 
opinion would have much to say about such activities. It would react better 
to a quiet and sober form of celebration rather than to a bunch of wild 
jubilation. Surely the time had come for us Germans to remember that this 
war was not our doing, and thus that we should always be willing to 
contribute our share to a reconciliation of mankind. For this reason, it 
wouldn’t be wise to besmirch the radiant deeds of our army with 
unbecoming jubilation; the rest of the world would never understand this. 
Furthermore, nothing is more appreciated than the modesty with which a 
true hero quietly and unassumingly carries on—and willingly forgets the 
past. Such was the gist of their warning. 

Instead of taking these fellows by their long ears, dragging them to 
some ditch, and stringing them up on a rope—so that the victorious 
enthusiasm of the nation would no longer offend the aesthetic sensibilities 
of these knights of the pen—a general campaign was conducted against 
what was called ‘unseemly’ forms of celebration. 


187 


MEIN KAMPF 


No one seemed to have the faintest idea that, once public enthusiasm 
is damped, nothing can spark it again, when the need arises. It’s an 
intoxication, and must be maintained in that form. Without the power of 
an enthusiastic spirit, how would it be possible to endure a struggle that 
made such immense demands on the spiritual qualities of the nation? 

I was only too well acquainted with the psychology of the broad masses 
not to know that, in such cases, a high ‘aesthetic’ tone cannot fan the fire 
enough to keep the iron hot. In my eyes, it was even a mistake not to have 
tried to raise the pitch of public enthusiasm higher still. Therefore I couldn’t 
atall understand why they adopted the opposite policy—that is, of damping 
the public spirit. 


5.7 MISRECOGNIZING MARXISM 


The second thing that irritated me was the manner in which Marxism 
was regarded and accepted. In my eyes, all this proved how little they knew 
about this plague. It was believed, in all seriousness, that the abolition of 
party distinctions during the war made Marxism a mild and moderate thing. 

But this was no question of party. It was a matter of a doctrine that 
must lead to the destruction of all humanity. The intention of this doctrine 
was misunderstood because nothing was said about it in our Jew-ridden 
universities, and because our arrogant bureaucratic officials didn’t think it 
worthwhile to study a subject that wasn’t included in the university 
curriculum. This mighty revolutionary trend was going right in front of 
them; but those ‘intellectuals’ didn’t pay any attention. That’s why state 
institutions nearly always lag behind private enterprises. It is to such 
people, by God, that the maxim applies: ‘What the peasant doesn’t know, 
won’t bother him.’ Here too, a few exceptions only confirm the rule. 

In August of 1914, the German worker was looked upon as a Marxist. 
That was absurd. When those fateful hours dawned, the German worker shook 
off the poisonous clutches of that plague; otherwise he wouldn’t have been 
so ready and willing to fight. People were stupid enough to imagine that 
Marxism had now become ‘national’—another demonstration of the fact that 
the authorities never took the trouble to study the essence of Marxist teaching. 
If they had done so, they never would have made such foolish errors. 

Marxism—whose final objective was, is, and will continue to be the 
destruction of all non-Jewish national states—saw in those days of July 
1914 how the German working classes were aroused by a national spirit, 


188 


CHAPTERS 


and rapidly entered the service of the Fatherland. Within a few days, the 
deceptive smoke-screen of that infamous national betrayal vanished into 
thin air, and the gang of Jewish bosses suddenly found themselves alone 
and deserted. It was as if no vestige remained of the folly and madness that 
was foisted upon the mass of the German people for 60 years. That was a 
bad day for the betrayers of the German working class. The moment, 
however, that the leaders recognized the danger that threatened them, they 
pulled the magic cap of deceit over their ears, and insolently mimicked the 
national awakening. 

The time had come for taking action against these Jewish poisoners of 
the people. That was the time to deal with them, regardless of any whining 
or protestation. At one stroke, in August of 1914, all the empty nonsense 
about international solidarity was knocked out of the heads of the German 
working classes. A few weeks later, instead of this stupid talk ringing in 
their ears, they heard the noise of American-made shrapnel bursting over 
the heads of the marching columns; there was your ‘international 
brotherhood.’ Now that the German worker had rediscovered the road to 
nationhood, it should have been the duty of any caring government to 
mercilessly root out the agitators who were misleading the nation. 

If the best were dying atthe front, the least we could do is to exterminate 
the vermin. 

Instead, His Majesty the Kaiser held out his hand to these old criminals, 
thus sparing these treacherous murderers of the nation and allowing them 
to regain their composure. 

And so the viper could begin his work again—this time, more carefully 
than before, but even more destructively. While honest people dreamt of 
reconciliation, these perjured criminals were organizing a revolution. 


5.8 THE USE OF NAKED FORCE 


Naturally I was distressed at the half-measures that were adopted at 
that time; but I never thought it possible that the final consequences could 
have been so disastrous. 

But what should have been done? Throw the ringleaders into jail, 
prosecute them, and rid the nation of them. Uncompromising military 
measures should have been adopted to root out this pestilence. Parties 
should have been abolished, and the Reichstag brought to its senses at the 
point of the bayonet, if necessary—or better still, immediately dissolved. 


189 


MEIN KAMPF 


Just as the Republic today dissolves the parties when it wants to, so in those 
days there was even more justification for doing so, seeing that the very 
existence of the nation was at stake! 

Of course, this suggestion would give rise to the question: Is it possible 
to eradicate ideas with the sword? Can a worldview be attacked by means 
of force? 

At that time, I turned these questions over and over again in my mind. 

By studying analogous cases in history, particularly those arising from 
religious circumstances, I came to the following fundamental conclusion: 

Ideas and philosophical systems, as well as movements grounded on a 
definite spiritual foundation, whether true or not, can never be broken by 
the use of force after a certain stage, except on one condition: namely, that 
this use of force is in the service of a new creative idea or worldview. 

The application of force alone, without moral support based on a 
spiritual concept, can never bring about the destruction of an idea or halt its 
propagation—unless one is willing to ruthlessly root out its last remaining 
defenders, and also to destroy any remaining tradition. Now, in most cases, 
the result of such action has been to exclude sucha state, either temporarily 
or forever, from the sphere of political significance. But experience has also 
shown that such a blood sacrifice arouses the better segment of the people. 
As a matter of fact, every persecution that is unsupported by spiritual 
motives is morally unjust; it raises opposition among the best elements of 
the population—to the point that they are driven to champion the very ideas 
that are unjustly persecuted. With many people, this arises from a sheer 
feeling of opposition to every attempt at suppressing ideas by brute force. 

In this way, the number of convinced followers of the persecuted 
doctrine grows as the persecution increases. Hence the total destruction of 
a new doctrine can be accomplished only by a complete rooting-out— 
which ultimately means the loss of some of the best blood in a nation or 
state. As a consequence, even though a so-called ‘internal’ clean-up may 
occur, it will cause a collapse in the nation’s strength. And such a procedure 
is always condemned to futility from the very start, if the attacked doctrine 
has spread beyond a small circle. 

That’s why in this case, as with all other growths, the doctrine can best 
be destroyed in its earliest stages. As time goes on, its powers of resistance 
increase—until it approaches old age and then gives way to younger ideas, 
but in another form and from other motives. 


190 


CHAPTER 5 


5.9 ATTACK OF A WORLDVIEW 


The fact remains that nearly all attempts to root out a doctrine and its 
organizational manifestations, without having some spiritual basis of attack 
against it, are doomed to failure. In many cases, in fact, the very opposite 
was achieved, for the following reasons: 

When sheer force is used to combat the spread of a doctrine, then that 
force must be employed systematically and persistently. In other words, the 
chances of success in the suppression of a doctrine lie only in the persistent 
and uniform application of the methods chosen. The moment hesitation is 
shown, and periods of tolerance alternate with the application of force, the 
targeted doctrine will not only recover strength, but every successive 
persecution will bring with it new adherents who have been shocked by the 
oppressive methods used. The old followers will become more embittered, 
and their allegiance will thereby be strengthened. Therefore, when force is 
employed, success is dependent on the consistent manner in which it is used. 

This persistence, however, is nothing less than the product of definite 
spiritual convictions. Every form of force that isn’t supported by a spiritual 
backing will always be indecisive and uncertain. Such a force lacks the 
stability that can be found only in a worldview that has its devoted 
champions. Such a force is the expression of individual energies; it 
therefore is periodically dependent upon the change of persons in charge, 
and also upon their characters and capacities. 

But there is something else to be said: 

Every worldview, whether religious or political—and it’s sometimes 
hard to differentiate the two—fights not so much for the negative 
destruction of the opposing world of ideas as for the positive realization of 
its own ideas. Its struggle thus lies more in attack rather than in defense. It 
has the advantage of knowing where its objective lies, and this objective 
represents the realization of its own ideas. 

Inversely, it’s difficult to say when the negative aim of the destruction 
of a hostile doctrine is achieved. For this reason alone, an aggressive 
worldview is more powerful and decisive in action than one that takes up 
a merely defensive attitude. If force is used to combat a spiritual power, 
that force remains a defensive measure, as long as its advocates aren’t the 
standard-bearers and apostles of a new spiritual doctrine. 

To sum up, we can establish the following: 

That every attempt to combat a worldview by means of force will tum 
out futile in the end, if the struggle fails to take the form of an offensive 


191 


MEIN KAMPF 


for the establishment of an entirely new spiritual attitude. It is only in the 
struggle between two worldviews that physical force, consistently and 
ruthlessly applied, will eventually succeed. 

This is why the fight against Marxism failed. 

This was also the reason why Bismarck’s anti-socialist legislation 
failed, and was bound to fail in the long run, despite everything. It lacked 
the basis of a new worldview to serve as the basis for the development and 
extension of the struggle. To say that the drivel about so-called ‘state 
authority’ or ‘law and order’ was an adequate foundation for the spiritual 
driving force in a life-or-death struggle is just what one would expect to 
hear from the ‘wise ones’ in high official positions. 

It was because there were no adequate spiritual motives behind this 
offensive that Bismarck was compelled to hand over the administration of 
his socialist legislative measures to the judgment of those who were 
themselves the product of the Marxist teaching. Thus the Iron Chancellor 
surrendered the fate of his struggle against Marxism to the goodwill of the 
bourgeois democracy. He left the goat to take care of the garden. 

But this was only the necessary result of the failure to find a fundamentally 
new anti-Marxist worldview, one with a stormy will to conquer. 

And thus the result of the Bismarckian campaign was deplorable. 

Were the conditions any different during the World War, or at the 
beginning of it? Unfortunately, no. 


5.10 BOURGEOIS CLASS PARTIES 


The more I examined the need for a change in the government’s attitude 
towards Social Democracy as the embodiment of contemporary Marxism, 
the more I realized the lack of a practical substitute for this doctrine. 
Supposing Social Democracy were overthrown, what would be offered to 
the masses instead? There wasn’t one movement in existence that promised 
any success in attracting large numbers of workers who are presently 
leaderless. It is nonsensical to imagine that the international fanatic who 
has just severed his connection with a class party would henceforth join a 
bourgeois party—or in other words, another class organization. However 
unsatisfactory these various organizations may appear to be, it cannot be 
denied that bourgeois politicians view the distinction between classes as a 
very important factor in social life—provided it doesn’t become politically 
disadvantageous to them. 


192 


CHAPTER 5 


The denial of this fact only proves the impudence, and also the 
stupidity, of the liars. 

Generally speaking, one should guard against considering the masses 
as stupider than they really are. In political matters, it often happens that 
feeling is a better judge than intellect. But the idea that this stupid 
international attitude of the masses is sufficient proof of their unsoundness 
is refuted by the simple fact that pacifist democracy is no less insane, even 
though it draws its supporters almost exclusively from bourgeois circles. 
As long as millions of citizens daily swallow what the Jewish democratic 
press tells them, they are in no position to joke about the stupidity of the 
‘comrades’—who, in the end, swallow the same garbage, though in a 
different form. In both cases, the maker is one and the same Jew. 

One has to be careful about contradicting established facts. It’s an 
undeniable fact that the class question has nothing to do with questions 
concerning ideals, as is claimed at election time. Class arrogance among a 
large section of our people, as well as a prevailing tendency to look down 
on the manual laborer, are obvious facts, and not the fantasies of some 
daydreamer. 

Nevertheless, it only shows the mentality of our so-called intelligentsia, 
that they have not yet grasped the fact that any circumstances that are 
incapable of preventing the growth of such a plague as Marxism are 
certainly not capable of restoring what has been lost. 

The ‘bourgeois’ parties, as they call themselves, will never again be 
able to win over the ‘proletarian’ masses. The two worlds stand opposed 
to one.another, partly by nature and partly artificially. These two camps 
have just one mutual relation, namely, struggle. But in such a fight, the 
younger will succeed—and that’s Marxism. 

-In 1914, a fight against Social Democracy was indeed quite 
conceivable. But the lack of any practical substitute made it doubtful how 
long the fight could be kept up. 

In this respect, there was a gaping void. 

Long before the war, I was of the same opinion. This was why I 
couldn’t decide to join any of the existing parties. During the course of the 
World War, my conviction was still further confirmed by the obvious 
impossibility of fighting Social Democracy in anything like a thorough 
way. This would have required a movement that was something more than 
a mere ‘parliamentary’ party. 

I frequently discussed this with my intimate comrades. 

And it was then that I first thought of taking up political work later on. 


193 


MEIN KAMPF 


I often assured my friends that, after the war, I intended to become a 
speaker, in addition to my professional work. 
And I know that I was very serious about this. 


194 


CHAPTER 6: 
WAR PROPAGANDA 


In watching the course of political events, I was always struck by the 
active part played by propaganda. I saw that the Marxist socialist 
organizations knew how to handle this tool in a masterly way, and how to 
put it to practical uses. Thus I soon came to realize that the right use of 
propaganda was an art in itself, and that this art was practically unknown 
to our bourgeois parties. Only the Christian-Socialist Party, especially in 
Lueger’s time, showed a certain efficiency in the use of this instrument, 
and owed much of their success to it. 

It was during the war, however, that we had the best chance of 
estimating the tremendous results that could be obtained by a properly 
conducted propagandist system. Here again, unfortunately, everything was 
left to the other side. The work done on our side was worse than 
insignificant. It was the total failure of the whole German system of 
information—perfectly obvious to every soldier—that urged me to consider 
the question of propaganda in a comprehensive way. 

I had ample opportunity to learn a practical lesson in this matter; 
unfortunately, it was only too well taught by the enemy. 

The lack on our side was exploited by the enemy in such an efficient 
manner that it showed itself as a real work of genius. In that enemy 
propaganda, I found admirable sources of instruction. The lesson to be 
learned from this unfortunately had no attraction for the geniuses on our 
own side. They were simply above such things—partly because they were 
too clever to learn from the enemy, and partly because there was a lack of 
good will. 

Had we any propaganda at all? 

Unfortunately I must answer in the negative. Everything that was 
actually done in this direction was so utterly inadequate and misconceived 


195 


MEIN KAMPF 


from the very beginning that proved not only useless, but at times 
downright harmful. 

In substance it was insufficient. Psychologically it was all wrong. 
Anyone who examined German propaganda would see that. 

There wasn’t even any clarity about the primary question itself: Is 
propaganda a means or an end? 

Propaganda is a means, and must therefore be judged in relation to its 
end. It must be organized in such a way as to be capable of attaining its 
objective. And it’s also obvious that the objective can vary in importance 
from the standpoint of general need, and that the essential internal character 
of the propaganda must vary accordingly. The cause for which we fought 
during the war was the noblest and highest that man could strive for. We were 
fighting for the freedom and independence of our country, for the security of 
our future welfare, and for the honor of the nation. Despite all views to the 
contrary, such honor does actually exist—or rather it will have to exist. A 
nation without honor will sooner or later lose its freedom and independence. 
This is in accordance with the ruling of higher justice, for a generation of 
rabble is not entitled to freedom. He who would be a slave cannot have honor. 
In such a case, honor would soon become an object of contempt. 


6.1 THE PURPOSE OF PROPAGANDA 


Germany was waging war for its very existence. The purpose of its war 
propaganda should have been to strengthen the fighting spirit in that 
struggle, and to help bring about victory. 

But when nations are fighting for their existence on this earth, when 
the fateful question of ‘to be or not to be’ must be answered, then all 
humane and aesthetic considerations must be set aside. These ideals don’t 
float about in the air, but are the product of man’s creative imagination; 
they disappear when he disappears. Nature knows nothing of them. 
Moreover, they are characteristic of only a small number of nations—or 
rather, of races—and their value depends on the degree to which they spring 
from the national or racial feeling. Humane and aesthetic ideals will 
disappear from the inhabited earth when those races that created and upheld 
them disappear. 

All such ideals are only of secondary importance when a nation is 
fighting for its existence. In fact, they must be excluded from the struggle 


196 


CHAPTER 6 


as soon as they threaten to weaken the nation’s power of self-preservation. 
That has always been their only visible effect. 

As for humanitarianism, Moltke stated that in time of war, one must 
reach the quickest decision, and that the most ruthless methods of fighting 
are also the most humane.! 

When people attempt to answer this reasoning with nonsense about 
aesthetics and so on, only one answer can be given: that the vital questions 
involved in the struggle of a nation for its existence must not be 
subordinated to aesthetic considerations. The yoke of slavery is and always 
will remain the most unpleasant experience that mankind can endure. Do 
the Schwabing? decadents look upon Germany’s lot today as ‘aesthetic’? 
And we certainly don’t have to discuss such a question with the Jews, 
because they are the modern inventors of this cultural perfume. Their very 
existence is an incarnate denial of the aesthetics of God’s image. 

Since these ideals of humanitarianism and beauty have no place in 
warfare, they must not be used as standards of war propaganda. 

During the war, propaganda was a means to an end. And this end was 
the struggle for existence of the German nation. Propaganda, therefore, 
should have been regarded from the standpoint of its usefulness for that 
purpose. The cruelest weapons were then the most humane, provided they 
helped towards a speedier victory. And only those methods were good and 
beautiful that helped secure the dignity and freedom of the nation. 

Such was the only possible attitude to adopt towards war propaganda 
in a life-or-death struggle. 

If those so-called responsible authorities had realized this, there would 
have been no uncertainty about the form and use of war propaganda as a 
weapon; it is nothing but a weapon, and indeed a most terrifying weapon 
in the hands of those who know how to use it. 


6.2 PROPAGANDA ONLY FOR THE MASSES 


The second question of decisive importance is this: To whom should 
propaganda be addressed? To the educated intellectual classes, or to the 
less educated masses? 


' Helmuth von Moltke (1800-1891) was chief of staff for the Prussian military. 


? Schwabing is a ‘bohemian’ and artist district in Munich, not far from the 
university. 


197 


MEIN KAMPF 


Propaganda must always address itself to the masses! 

For the so-called intelligentsia, propaganda is not appropriate, but 
rather scientific instruction. Propaganda has as little to do with science as 
an advertisement poster has to do with art. The art of the poster consists in 
the designer’s ability to attract the attention of the crowd through form and 
colors. A poster announcing an exhibition of art has no other aim than to 
convince the public of the importance of the exhibition. The better it does 
that, the better it is. Being meant to impress upon the public the meaning 
of the exposition, the poster can never take the place of the art on display. 
They are two entirely different things. Therefore, those who wish to study 
the artistic display must study something that’s quite different from the 
poster—and it won’t be enough to merely wander through the gallery. The 
student of art must carefully and thoroughly study each exhibit in order to 
form a judicious opinion about it. 

The situation is the same with respect to the word ‘propaganda.’ 

The purpose of propaganda is not the personal instruction of the 
individual, but rather to attract public attention to certain things—the 
importance of which can be impressed upon the masses only by this means. 

The art of propaganda consists in putting a matter so clearly and 
forcibly that is creates a general conviction regarding the reality, necessity, 
and justice of a certain essential thing. But this art is not an end in itself. 
Its purpose must be exactly that of the advertisement poster: to attract the 
attention of the masses. It should not dispense individual instructions to 
those who already have an educated opinion on things, or who wish to form 
such an opinion on grounds of objective study. This is not the purpose of 
propaganda. It must appeal to the feelings of the public rather than to their 
so-called rationality. 

All propaganda must be presented in a popular form; it must adjust its 
intellectual level to the least intelligent of those to whom it is directed. Thus 
its purely intellectual level will have to be that of the lowest mental 
common denominator among the public it is desired to reach. When it’s a 
question of bringing a whole nation within the circle of its influence—as 
in the case of war propaganda—then great care must be taken to avoid a 
high level, which presupposes a relatively high degree of intelligence 
among the public. 

The more modest the scientific tenor of this propaganda, and the more 
it is addressed exclusively to public sentiment, the more decisive will be 
its success. This is the best test of the value of a propaganda—and not the 
approval of a small group of intellectuals or artists. 


198 


CHAPTER 6 


6.3 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PROPAGANDA 


The art of propaganda consists precisely in being able to awaken the 
imagination of the public through an appeal to their feelings—that is, in 
finding the appropriate psychological form that will appeal to the hearts of 
the masses. The fact that our ‘bright boys’ don’t understand this merely 
shows their conceit and mental laziness. 

Once we see the need to concentrate the persuasive forces of 
propaganda on the masses, the following lesson results: 

It’s a mistake to make propaganda multi-sided, as if it were a system 
of scientific instruction. 

The receptive powers of the masses are very restricted, and their 
understanding is feeble. On the other hand, they quickly forget. Such being 
the case, all effective propaganda must be confined to a few bare essentials, 
and those must be expressed in stereotyped formulas. These slogans should 
be persistently repeated until the very last individual has come to grasp the 
idea that has been put forth. If this principle is forgotten, and if an attempt 
is made to be abstract and general, the propaganda will tur out ineffective; 
the public won’t be able to digest or retain what’s offered to them in this 
way. 

Therefore, propaganda must follow a simple line; correspondingly, the 
basic tactics must be psychologically efficient. 

It was, for example, a fundamental mistake to ridicule the value of the 
enemy, as the Austrian and German comic papers did. The very principle 
here is a mistaken one. When they came face to face with the enemy, our 
soldiers had quite a different impression. Therefore, the mistake had 
disastrous results. Once the German soldier realized what a tough enemy 
he had to fight, he felt that he had been deceived by the makers of his 
information. Instead of strengthening and stimulating his fighting spirit, 
this information had quite the opposite effect. Finally he lost heart. 

On the other hand, British and American war propaganda was 
psychologically efficient. By representing the Germans to their own people 
as barbarians and Huns, they were preparing their soldiers for the horrors 
of war, and safeguarding them against illusions. The most terrible weapons 
that those soldiers encountered in the field merely confirmed the 
information that they had already received, and their belief in the truth of 
the assertions made by their governments was accordingly reinforced. And 
their rage and hatred against the vile enemy was increased. The terrible 
havoc caused by the German weapons of war was only another illustration 


199 


MEIN KAMPF 


of the ‘Hunnish’ brutality of the barbarians; and their soldiers had no time 
to consider the fact that their own weapons were capable of an equal degree 
of terror. 

Thus the British soldier was never allowed to feel that the information 
he received at home was false. Unfortunately the opposite was the case 
with the Germans, who finally wound up rejecting everything from home 
as pure swindle and humbug. All this was a result of the idea that any old 
simpleton—or anyone who was intelligent about ‘other things’-—could be 
entrusted with propaganda work. And they had no idea that propaganda 
demands the greatest psychological skill. 

Thus the German war propaganda gave us an incomparable example 
of how the work of ‘enlightenment’ should vot be done, and how such an 
example was the result of a complete failure to take any psychological 
considerations into account. 


6.4 SUBJECTIVE — ONE-SIDED — NECESSARY! 


From the enemy, however, much could be learned by those who kept 
their eyes open, whose powers of perception had not yet become sclerotic, 
and who, during 4/4 years, had to experience the perpetual flood of enemy 
propaganda. 

The worst of all was that our people didn’t understand the very first 
rule of propaganda: namely, a systematically one-sided attitude towards 
every problem to be dealt with. In this regard, so many errors were 
committed, even from the very start of the war, that it was justifiable to 
doubt whether so much nonsense could really be attributed to the stupidity 
of those in power. 

What, for example, would we say of a poster that advertised some new 
brand of soap by insisting that the competitive brands were ‘good’? 

We would only shake our heads. 

Exactly the same applies to political advertising. 

The aim of propaganda is not to try to pass judgment on conflicting 
rights, giving each its due, but exclusively to emphasize the right that we are 
asserting. Propaganda must not investigate the truth objectively and, insofar 
as it is favorable to the other side, present it according to the academic 
fairness; it must present only that which is favorable to its own side. 

It was a fundamental mistake to discuss the question of who was 
responsible for the outbreak of the war, and to declare that the sole 


200 


CHAPTER 6 


responsibility could not be attributed to Germany. Sole responsibility 
should have been laid squarely on the shoulders of the enemy, without any 
discussion as to whether this was true or not. 

And what was the consequence of these half-measures? 

The broad masses of the people are not made up of diplomats, or 
professors of political law, nor simply of people who are able to form 
reasoned judgment about things. Rather, they are a vacillating, child-like 
crowd who are constantly wavering between one idea and another. As soon 
as our own propaganda made the slightest suggestion that the enemy might 
have some valid concerns, the foundations were laid for questioning the 
Justice of our own cause. The masses are in no position to discern where 
the enemy’s injustice ends and where ours begins. In such a case, they 
become hesitant and distrustful, especially when the enemy doesn’t make 
the same mistake, but heaps all the blame on the other side. 

Could there be any clearer proof than the fact that our own people 
believed the enemy’s propaganda, which was uniform and consistent, rather 
than its own? And that, of course, was increased by the German mania for 
objectivity! Everybody become so careful about doing an injustice to the 
enemy, even at the cost of seriously injuring or ruining his own people and 
state. 

Naturally the masses were never aware of the fact that those in 
authority had failed to study the subject from this angle. 

The great majority of a nation is so feminine in character and outlook 
that its thought and conduct are ruled by sentiment, rather than by sober 
reasoning. 

This sentiment, however, is not complex, but simple and consistent. 
It’s not highly differentiated, but has only the negative and positive notions 
of love and hatred, right and wrong, truth and falsehood. Its notions are 
never partly this and partly that. 

English propaganda especially understood this in a marvelous way— 
and they acted accordingly. They allowed no half-measures that might have 
given rise to doubt. 

Their brilliant understanding of the primitive feeling of the masses was 
shown in their policy of atrocity propaganda, which was adapted to the 
conditions of the time. They cleverly and ruthlessly prepared the ground 
for moral solidarity at the front, even in times of great defeats. Further, the 
way in which they pilloried the German enemy as solely responsible for 
the war—a brutal and absolute lie—and the way in which they proclaimed 
his guilt, was excellently calculated to reach the masses. They realized that 


201 


MEIN KAMPF 


the masses are always extreme in their feelings. And so this atrocious lie 
was believed. 

The effectiveness of this kind of propaganda is well illustrated by the 
fact that, after four years, not only was the enemy still carrying on his 
propaganda work, but it was already undermining the stamina of our people 
at home. 

It’s no surprise that our propaganda didn’t achieve similar results. It 
had the germ of inefficiency lodged in it by reason of its inner ambiguity. 
And because of the nature of its content, one couldn’t expect it to make the 
necessary impression on the masses. Only our hare-brained ‘statesmen’ 
could have imagined that such pacifistic swill could have inspired the 
necessary passion that leads men to die for their country. 

And so this product of ours was not only worthless, but detrimental. 


6.5 RESTRICTION ON PERSEVERANCE 


No matter what amount of talent is employed in the organization of 
propaganda, it will be worthless if one doesn’t take account of these 
fundamental principles. Propaganda must be limited to a few simple 
themes, and these must be represented again and again. Here, as in many 
other cases, perseverance is the first and most important condition for 
success. 

Particularly in the field of propaganda, placid aesthetes and blasé 
intellectuals should never be allowed to take the lead. The former would 
readily transform the impressive character of real propaganda into 
something suitable only for literary tea parties. As to the second group, one 
must always beware of them because, lacking any fresh emotion of their 
own, they are always seeking new excitements. 

Such people quickly tire of everything. They always long for change 
and will always be incapable of understanding the needs of their fellow 
men. They are always the first to criticize propaganda, or rather its message, 
because it appears to them to be outmoded and trivial. They are always 
looking for something new, always yearning for change; and thus they 
become the mortal enemies of all efforts to influence the masses in an 
effective way. The moment the organization and message of a propagandist 
movement begins to suit their tastes, it becomes incoherent and scattered. 

The purpose of propaganda is not to create an interesting distraction 
for blasé young men. Its chief function is to convince the masses, whose 


202 


CHAPTER 6 


slowness of understanding needs to be given time to absorb the message. 
Only after the simplest ideas are repeated a thousand times will they finally 
remember them. 


6.6 ENEMY WAR PROPAGANDA 


Every change that’s made in the propagandist message must always 
emphasize the same conclusion. The leading slogan must of course be 
illustrated in many ways and from several angles, but in the end, one must 
always retum to the assertion of the same formula. This is the only way 
that propaganda can have consistent and dynamic effects. 

Only by following these general lines and steadfastly sticking to them, 
with uniform and consistent emphasis, can we attain final success. One will 
then be rewarded by the surprising and almost incredible results that such 
a persistent policy delivers. 

The success of any advertisement, whether of a business or political 
nature, depends on the consistency and perseverance with which it is 
applied. 

Here too, the enemy propaganda gave us an excellent example. It 
confined itself to a few themes, which were meant exclusively for mass 
consumption, and it repeated these themes with untiring persistence. Once 
these fundamental themes and the manner of placing them before the world 
were recognized as correct, they adhered to them without the slightest 
alteration for the whole duration of the war. At first it appeared to be idiotic 
in its impudent assertiveness. Later it was looked upon as disturbing. But 
in the end, it was believed. After 4% years, a revolution broke out in 
Germany; its slogans came from the enemy’s war propaganda. 

But in England they came to understand something further: namely, 
that this intellectual weapon can succeed only if it’s applied on a vast scale. 
But this success more than rewards the cost. 

Their propaganda was regarded as a first class weapon, while for us it 
was the last hope of unemployed politicians, and a cozy job for slackers. 

All in all, and as expected, its results were zero. 


203 


CHAPTER 7: 
THE REVOLUTION 


In 1915, the enemy started his propaganda among our soldiers. From 
1916 onwards, it steadily became more intensive, and at the beginning of 
1918, it became a virtual flood. One could now judge the effects of this 
proselytizing movement at every step. Gradually our soldiers began to think 
just as the enemy wished them to. 

On the German side, it was a complete failure. 

At that time, the army authorities, under our able and determined 
commander, were also willing and ready to take up the propaganda fight, 
but unfortunately they didn’t have the necessary means to make it happen. 
And in any case, it would have been a psychological error if they had done 
so. To be effective, propaganda had to come from home. Only then would 
it have been a success among men who, for nearly four years, were 
performing immortal deeds of heroism and privation for the homeland. 

But what were the people at home doing? 

Was their failure to act stupidity, or criminal? 

In midsummer 1918, after the evacuation of the southern bank of the 
Marne, the German press adopted a policy that was so woefully inadequate, 
and even criminally stupid, that a question arose—one that made me more 
furious every day: Is there no one who will dare to put an end to this 
spiritual sabotage of our heroic troops? 

What happened in France during 1914, when our armies invaded that 
country in a storm of victory? What happened in Italy when their armies 
collapsed on the Isonzo front?! What happened in France again during the 
spring of 1918, when German divisions took the main French positions by 
storm, and heavy long-distance artillery bombarded Paris? 


' The Isonzo River, in present-day Slovenia, was the site of a number of battles 
between Austria-Hungary and Italy between 1915 and 1917. 


205 


MEIN KAMPF 


How they whipped up the courage of those troops who were retreating, 
and fanned the fires of national enthusiasm among them! How their 
propaganda and their ingenious mass-influence reawakened the fighting 
spirit in that broken front, and hammered into them a firm belief in final 
victory! 

Meanwhile, what were our people doing? 

Nothing, or even worse than nothing! 

Again and again, I became enraged and indignant as I read the latest 
papers and realized the nature of the psychological mass-murder they were 
committing. 

More than once, I was tormented by the thought that if Providence had 
put me in charge of German propaganda, instead of those incompetent and 
even criminal ignoramuses and scoundrels, the outcome of our battle with 
fate might have been different. 

During those months, I felt for the first time that a malicious Destiny 
was keeping me on the fighting front and in a position where any random 
bullet from some nigger might finish me off—while elsewhere I could have 
done a real service for the Fatherland! 

I was then rash enough to believe that I would have been successful. 

But I was a nameless soldier, one among 8 million! 

And so it was better for me to keep my mouth shut and do my duty as 
best I could. 


7.1 THE FIRST ENEMY LEAFLETS 


In the summer of 1915, the first enemy leaflets were dropped on us. 

They all told more or less the same story, with some minor variation: 
Suffering was steadily increasing in Germany. The war would last 
indefinitely. The prospect of victory for us was becoming fainter by the 
day. The people at home were longing for peace, but that ‘militarism’ 
and the ‘Kaiser’ would not permit it. The whole world—which knew this 
very well—wasn’t waging war against the German people but only 
against the man who was exclusively responsible, the Kaiser. And 
finally, that until this enemy of world-peace was removed, there could 
be no end to the conflict. When the war was over, the liberal and 
democratic nations would receive the Germans as colleagues in the 
league for world peace. This would happen the moment that ‘Prussian 
militarism’ was destroyed. 


206 


CHAPTER 7 


To illustrate and substantiate all these statements, the leaflets often 
contained ‘Letters from Home.’ The contents appeared to confirm the 
enemy’s assertions. 

Generally speaking, we only laughed at all these efforts. The leaflets 
were read, sent to base headquarters, and then forgotten—until the wind 
once again blew a fresh batch into the trenches. These were mostly dropped 
from airplanes that were specially used for that purpose. 

One feature of this propaganda was very striking: namely, in sections 
where Bavarian troops were stationed, every effort was made to stir up 
feelings against the Prussians. It assured the soldiers that Prussia and 
Prussia alone was the guilty party who was responsible for the whole war, 
and that there was no hostility whatsoever towards the Bavarians. But that 
there would be no possibility of coming to their assistance as long as they 
continued to serve Prussian interests and helped to pull the Prussian 
chestnuts out of the fire. 

This persistent propaganda began to have a real effect in 1915. The 
feelings against Prussia grew quite visibly among the Bavarian troops; but 
those in authority did nothing to counteract it. This was more than a mere 
sin of omission. Sooner or later, not only were the Prussians bound to suffer 
for it, but the whole German nation and consequently the Bavarians as well. 

In this direction, enemy propaganda began to achieve undoubted 
success from 1916 onwards. 

In a similar way, letters coming directly from home had long since been 
exercising their effect. There was now no further need for the enemy to 
broadcast such letters in leaflet form. And also against this influence from 
home, nothing was done—except a few supremely stupid ‘warnings’ 
uttered by the ‘government.’ The whole front was drenched in this poison 
sent by thoughtless women at home. They didn’t suspect for a moment that 
the enemy’s chances of final victory were thereby strengthened, or that the 
sufferings of their own men at the front were thereby being prolonged and 
rendered more severe. These senseless letters written by German women 
eventually cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of our men. 


7.2. WOUNDED 


Thus, by 1916, several distressing phenomena had already appeared. 
The whole front was complaining and grousing, and discontented over 
many things—often justifiably so. While they were hungry and suffering, 


207 


MEIN KAMPF 


and while their relatives at home were in distress, others were feasting and 
celebrating. Yes—even on the front itself, everything was not as it should 
have been. 

Even in the early stages of the war, the soldiers were sometimes prone 
to complain; but such criticism was confined to ‘internal affairs.” The man 
who, at one moment, groused and grumbled, ceased a few minutes later, 
and went about his duty silently, as if all were in order. The same company 
that was initially discontented now clung to its piece of trench with tooth 
and nail, as if Germany’s fate depended on these few hundred meters of 
mud holes. The glorious old army was still at its post! 

A sudden change soon gave me first-hand experience of the contrast 
between this old army and the homeland. 

At the end of September 1916, my division was sent into the Battle of 
the Somme. For us this was the first of a series of heavy engagements, and 
it created an indescribable impression—more like hell than war. 

We stood firm through weeks of incessant artillery bombardment—at 
times ceding a little ground but then taking it back again, and never giving 
way. 

On 7 October 1916, I was wounded. 

I had the good luck of getting back to the rear, and I was then ordered 
to be sent by transport to Germany. 

Two years had passed since I left home—an almost endless period, in 
such circumstances. I could hardly imagine what Germans looked like 
without uniforms. In the field hospital at Hermies, I was startled when I 
suddenly heard the voice of a German nurse who was talking with one of 
the wounded men lying near me. 

After two years—to first hear such a sound! 

The nearer our train approached the German border, the more restless 
each of us became. En route we recognized all these places through which 
we passed two years before as young volunteers: Brussels, Louvain, Liége. 
Finally we recognized the first German homestead, with its familiar high 
gables and picturesque window-shutters. 

The Fatherland! 

In October 1914, we burned with stormy enthusiasm as we crossed the 
border. Now, silence and emotion reigned. Each of us was happy that fate 
allowed us to again see that which we had defended with our lives. And 
each was ashamed to let another look into his eye. 

It was almost on the anniversary of the day that I left for the front, when 
I reached the hospital at Beelitz near Berlin. 


208 


CHAPTER 7 


What a change! From the mud of the Somme battlefields to the spotless 
white beds in this wonderful building! We hesitated to lie in them. Only 
gradually did we grow accustomed to this new world again. 

But unfortunately this world was also different in another respect. 


7.3 BOASTING OF COWARDICE 


The spirit of the army at the front was foreign here. For the first time, 
I encountered something that was unknown at the front: boasting of one’s 
own cowardice. Though we certainly heard complaining and grousing at 
the front, this was never an incitement to insubordination, and certainly not 
a glorification of one’s fear. No! There, a coward was a coward, and nothing 
more. And the contempt for him that was aroused in others was quite 
general, just as the real hero was widely admired. But here in hospital, it 
was nearly the opposite. Loudmouthed agitators were heaping ridicule on 
the good soldier, and lauding the spineless coward. 

A couple of miserable human specimens set the tone. One of them 
boasted of having intentionally injured his hand in barbed-wire in order to 
get sent to hospital. Although his wound was slight, it appeared that he had 
been here for a long time. He got sent here in the transport train through 
some sort of a swindle. This poisonous specimen actually had the audacity 
to parade his cowardice as the result of a higher courage, one that was 
superior to that of the brave soldier who dies a hero’s death. Many listened 
in silence, others left, but some assented. 

Personally I was disgusted at the thought that such a seditious agitator 
was allowed to remain there. What could be done? The authorities must 
have known who and what he was; and actually they did know. But still 
they did nothing. 


7.4 SLACKERS 


As soon as I was able to walk again, I obtained leave to visit Berlin. 

Dire misery was everywhere. The metropolis, with its teeming millions, 
was suffering from hunger. The talk in the soldiers’ homes was much like 
that at the hospital. It seemed that these agitators had deliberately singled 
out such places, in order to spread their views. 

But conditions in Munich were far worse! 


209 


MEIN KAMPF 


After my discharge from hospital, I was sent to a reserve battalion 
there. I didn’t recognize anything. Anger, discontent, complaints— 
wherever one went! This was partly due to the highly inept manner in 
which the soldiers who had retumed from the front were treated by the non- 
commissioned officers—they who had never seen a day’s active service, 
and who were thus incapable of creating a decent relationship towards the 
old soldiers. The old soldiers displayed certain characteristics that had been 
developed from their time in the trenches. The reserve officers couldn’t 
understand these peculiarities. On the other hand, the officer home from 
active service was at least in a position to understand them himself. As a 
result, he received more respect from the men than the home officers. 

But apart from all this, the general spirit was miserable. The art of slacking 
was looked on as almost proof of higher intelligence, and devotion to duty 
was considered a sign of weakness or bigotry. Govemment offices were filled 
with Jews. Almost every clerk was a Jew, and nearly every Jew was a clerk. 
I was amazed at this multitude of combatants who belonged to the chosen 
people; and I couldn’t help comparing it with their slim numbers at the front. 

In the business world, the situation was even worse. Here the Jewish 
people had actually become ‘indispensable.’ Like spiders, they were slowly 
sucking the blood from the pores of the national body. Through the war 
corporations, they found an instrument whereby all national free trade could 
be finished off. 

Special emphasis was placed on the necessity of unhampered 
centralization. 

Thus as early as 1916-17, practically all production was under the 
control of Jewish finance. . 

But against whom was the anger of the people directed? 

It was then that I foresaw a looming disaster, one that would inevitably 
lead to collapse unless actions were taken in time. 


7.5 HATRED OF PRUSSIA 


While the Jew was busy robbing the nation and tightening the screws 
of his despotism, incitement against ‘the Prussians’ increased. And just as 
at the front, nothing was done to stop this poisonous propaganda. No one 
seemed capable of understanding that the collapse of Prussia could never 
bring about the rise of Bavaria. On the contrary, the collapse of the one 
would necessarily drag the other down into the abyss. 


210 


CHAPTER 7 


This kind of behavior affected me very deeply. I could see in it only a 
clever Jewish trick for diverting public attention from themselves to others. 
While Prussians and Bavarians were squabbling, the Jews were taking 
away the sustenance of both from under their very noses. While Prussians 
were being abused in Bavaria, the Jew organized the revolution, and with 
one stroke smashed both Prussia and Bavaria. 

I couldn’t tolerate this execrable squabbling among German peoples, 
and I longed to be at the front once again. Therefore, not long after arriving 
in Munich, I reported again for service. 

At the beginning of March 1917, I had rejoined my old regiment. 


7.6 THE ARMY’S NEW HOPE 


Towards the end of 1917, we seemed to have gotten over the worst 
phases of moral depression at the front. After the Russian collapse, the 
whole army recovered its courage and hope.’ All were gradually becoming 
more and more convinced that the struggle would end in victory. We could 
sing once again, and the naysayers faded from view. People once again 
believed in the future of the Fatherland. 

The Italian collapse in the autumn of 1917 had a wonderful effect. This 
victory proved that it was possible to break through another front, besides 
the Russian. An inspiring faith became dominant in the minds of millions, 
and it encouraged them to look forward with confidence to the spring of 
1918. The enemy was visibly depressed. During this winter, the front was 
somewhat quieter than usual. But that was the calm before the storm. 

Just when preparations were being made to launch a final offensive 
and bring this interminable war to an end—while endless columns of 
transports brought men and munitions to the front, and while the men were 
being trained for that final onslaught—then it was that the greatest act of 
treachery in the whole war occurred in Germany. 


? The Russian Revolution of 1917 consisted of two phases: A workers’ revolt in 
February that overthrew the Czar, and then the Bolshevik revolution in October 
that put the Jewish revolutionaries in power. Once in power, the Bolsheviks 
pulled Russia out of the war. This, as Hitler states, freed up German troops for 
the western front. 

3 The Battle of Caporetto took place from October 24 to November 19, near the 
present-day town of Kobarid, Slovenia, just across the Italian border. The 
Italians were routed by the Germans. 


211 


MEIN KAMPF 


Germany would not win the war: At the last moment, when victory 
seemed ready to fly with German banners, a means was arranged for the 
purpose of striking at the heart of the German spring offensive with one 
blow from the rear, thus making victory impossible. 

A munitions strike was organized.* 

If this had succeeded, the German front would have collapsed, and the 
wishes of the Vorwadrts that victory not take the side of the German banners 
would have been fulfilled.° For lack of munitions, the front would be 
broken through within a few weeks, the German offensive would be 
effectively stopped, and the Entente saved. International finance would 
assume control over Germany, and the internal goal of the Marxist national 
betrayal would be achieved. 

Their objective was the destruction of the national economic system 
and the establishment of international capitalistic domination in its place. 
And this goal has really been reached, thanks to the stupidity and credulity 
of the one side and the bottomless cowardice of the other. 

The munitions strike, however, didn’t bring the final success that was 
hoped for: namely, to starve the front of ammunition. It lasted too short a 
time for any lack of ammunition to bring disaster to the army, as was 
originally planned. But the moral damage was much more terrible! 

In the first place: What was the army fighting for, if the people at home 
didn’t wish for victory? For whom were these enormous sacrifices and 
privations being made? Should the soldiers fight for victory, while the home 
front goes on strike against it? 

And secondly: What effect did this move have on the enemy? 


7.7 THE ALLIES ARE BEATEN DOWN 


In the winter of 1917-18, dark clouds hovered in the firmament of the 
Entente. For nearly four years, many onslaughts were made against the 
German giant, but they failed to bring him to the ground. He fought them 
off with the one arm that held the defensive shield, because his other arm 
had to wield the sword against his other enemies, in the East and the South. 
But at last these enemies were overcome. Rivers of blood were shed in 
accomplishing that task. But now the sword was free to join withthe shield 


4 This occurred on 28 January 1918. 
5 Vorwarts was the official paper of the Social Democrats. 


212 


CHAPTER 7 


on the western front. And since the enemy was thus far unable to break the 
German defense, he himself was now facing attack. 

The enemy feared and trembled in the face of a German victory. 

In Paris and London, conferences followed one after another, in 
unending series. Even the enemy propaganda encountered difficulties. It 
was no longer so easy to demonstrate the hopelessness of a German victory. 

The same applied at the front. The insolence of their masters had 
suddenly subsided. A disturbing truth began to dawn on them. Their opinion 
of the German soldier had changed. Previously he was a fool destined for 
defeat. But now he was the destroyer of their Russian ally. The policy of 
restricting the offensive to the East, which in fact was a necessity, now 
appeared as a stroke of genius. For three years, these Germans had been 
battering away at the Russian front without any apparent success. Those 
fruitless efforts were almost sneered at; it was thought that, in the long run, 
the Russian giant would triumph through sheer force of numbers, while 
Germany would be worn out from shedding so much blood. And reality 
seemed to confirm this hope. 

Since the September days of 1914, when for the first time endless columns 
of Russian war prisoners poured into Germany after the Battle of Tannenberg, 
it seemed as if the stream would never end. As soon as one army was defeated 
and routed, another would take its place. The gigantic empire gave the Czar an 
inexhaustible supply of new soldiers—and the war its new victims. How long 
could Germany hold out in this race? Wouldn’t the day finally come when the 
Germans would win their last victory, and still the Russian armies would be 
marching into battle? And then what? In all likelihood, a Russian victory over 
Germany might be delayed, but it would inevitably come in the long run. 

Now all these hopes were at an end. The ally, Russia, who had 
sacrificed the most blood on the altar of their mutual interests, came to the 
end of his resources, and lay prostrate before his unrelenting foe. A feeling 
of terror and dismay came over the Entente soldiers, who had previously 
been sustained by blind faith. They feared the coming spring. Seeing that 
they had previously failed to break the Germans when they could 
concentrate only part of the fighting strength on the western front, how 
could they count on victory now that the entire power of that amazing 
heroic state appeared to be gathering for an attack in the west? 

The shadow of the events that took place in South Tyrol, the specter of 
General Cadorna’s defeated armies,° were reflected in the gloomy faces of 


6 Luigi Cadorna (1850-1928) was an Italian general who led his troops into 


213 


MEIN KAMPF 


the Entente troops in misty Flanders. Faith in victory gave way to fear of 
defeat to come. 


7.8 “GERMANY FACING REVOLUTION!” 


Then—on those cold nights, when one almost heard the tread of the 
German armies advancing to the great assault, and the decision was being 
awaited in fear and trembling, suddenly a flaming red light was set aglow 
in Germany, sending its rays into the last shell-hole on the enemy’s front. 
At the very moment when the German divisions were receiving their final 
orders for the great offensive, a general strike broke out in Germany. 

At first the world was dumbfounded. Then the enemy propaganda 
became active again and pounced on this theme at the eleventh hour. 
Suddenly a means appeared that could be used to revive the sinking 
confidence of the Allied soldiers. The probability of victory was now 
presented as certain, and the anxious foreboding about coming events was 
transformed into a determined confidence. The regiments awaiting German 
attack could now be inspired by the conviction that the decisive event in the 
war was not the boldness of the German attack, but rather the persistence 
of the defense. Let the Germans have whatever victories they liked; the 
revolution, and not the victorious army, was at the door of the homeland. 

British, French, and American newspapers began to spread this belief 
among their readers, while a shrewd propaganda campaign boosted the 
morale of the troops at the front. 

‘Germany Facing Revolution! Allied Victory Inevitable!’ That was the 
best medicine to set the staggering poi/u and Tommy on their feet once 
again. Our rifles and machine guns could now open fire once again; but 
instead of creating a panic-stricken retreat, they were met with a determined 
resistance. 

This was the result of the munitions strike. It strengthened the enemy’s 
belief in victory, and it relieved that paralyzing feeling of despair at the 
front. Consequently, the strike cost the lives of thousands of German 
soldiers. And the despicable instigators of that dastardly strike were 
candidates for the highest public offices in revolutionary Germany. 

At first it was apparently possible to overcome the repercussion of 
these events on the German soldiers. But on the enemy’s side, they had a 


defeat on the Isonzo front. 


214 


CHAPTER 7 


lasting effect. The resistance lost all the character of an army fighting for 
a lost cause, and in its place was a grim determination to struggle through 
to victory. 

Now, according to best judgment, victory would be assured if the 
western front could hold out against the German attack for only a few 
months. The Allied parliaments recognized the possibilities of a better 
future, and voted huge sums of money for on-going propaganda to disrupt 
Germany. 


7.9 LAST WREATHS OF IMMORTAL LAUREL 


It was my good luck to fight in the first two offensives, and in the last. 

These became the most stupendous impressions of my life— 
stupendous, because now for the last time, the struggle lost its defensive 
character and became that of an offense, just as it was in 1914. A sigh of 
relief went up from the German trenches and dug-outs when finally, after 
three years of endurance in that inferno, the day of retribution arrived. Once 
again the lusty cheering of victorious battalions was heard, as they hung 
the last crowns of the immortal laurel on the banners they consecrated to 
victory. Once again the strains of patriotic songs soared upwards to the 
heavens above the endless columns of marching troops, and for the last 
time the Lord smiled on his ungrateful children. 

In midsummer of 1918, a feeling of sultry oppression hung over the 
front. At home they were quarrelling. About what? We heard a great deal 
among various units at the front: that the war was now a hopeless affair; 
that only fools could think of victory; that it wasn’t the people but the 
capitalists and the monarchy who were interested in carrying on. Such were 
the ideas that came from home and were discussed at the front. 

At first there was only very slight reaction. What did universal suffrage 
matter to us? Is this why we fought for four years? It was a dastardly piece 
of robbery thus to steal from the graves of our heroes the ideals for which 
they had fallen. It wasn’t for the slogan, ‘Long Live Universal Suffrage’ 
that our troops in Flanders faced certain death, but for the cry ‘Deutschland 
tiber Alles in der Welt’—a small but not unimportant difference. And most 
of those who were shouting for this suffrage were absent when it came to 
fighting for it. The front was unknown to this political rabble. During those 
days, only a small fraction of these parliamentarian gentlemen were to be 
seen where honest Germans gathered. 


215 


MEIN KAMPF 


The old soldiers who had fought at the front had little liking for those 
new war aims of Messrs. Ebert, Scheidemann, Barth, Liebknecht, and 
others.’ We couldn’t understand why, all of a sudden, the slackers should 
grant all executive powers to themselves, without having any regard to the 
army. 

From the very beginning, I had my own definite personal views. I hated 
the whole gang of miserable party politicians who had betrayed the people. 
I long ago realized that national interests played only a very small part with 
this disreputable crew, and that what counted with them was the possibility 
of filling their own empty pockets. My opinion was that those people 
thoroughly deserved to be hanged, because they were ready to sacrifice the 
peace, and allow Germany to be defeated, just to serve their own ends. To 
consider their wishes would mean to sacrifice the interests of the working 
classes for the benefit of a gang of thieves. These wishes could only be 
fulfilled by sacrificing Germany. 

Such, too, was the opinion still held by the majority of the army. But 
the reinforcements that came from home were fast becoming worse and 
worse—so much so that their arrival was a source of weakness rather than 
of strength. The young recruits in particular were mostly useless. 
Sometimes it was hard to believe that they were sons of the same nation 
that sent its youth into the battles for Ypres. 


7.10 GROWING MORAL DECAY 


In August and September, the symptoms of moral disintegration 
increased rapidly, although the enemy’s offensive was not at all comparable 
to the terror of our former defensive battles. In contrast, the battles of the 
Somme and Flanders were much more terrible. 

At the end of September, my division occupied, for the third time, those 
positions that we had once taken by storm as young volunteers. 

What a memory! 


7 Friedrich Ebert (1871-1925) was a leader of the German Social Democrats, and 
the first President of Germany, post-WWI. Philipp Scheidemann (1865-1939) 
was a post-war Chancellor of Germany in 1919, succeeding Ebert. Emil Barth 
(1879-1941) was a key figure in the November Revolution of 1918. Karl 
Liebknecht (1871-1919) was also central to the Revolution; he was killed, along 
with Jewish socialist Rosa Luxemburg, shortly thereafter. Liebknecht was half- 
Jewish, the others German. 


216 


CHAPTER 7 


Here we had received our baptism by fire, in October and November 
1914. With a burning love of the homeland in our hearts and a song on our 
lips, our young regiment went into action as if going to a dance. The dearest 
blood was given freely here in the belief that it was shed to protect the 
freedom and independence of the Fatherland. 

In July 1917 we set foot for the second time on what we regarded as 
sacred soil. Our best comrades lay here, some of them little more than 
boys—the soldiers who had rushed into death, with gleaming eyes, for the 
one true Fatherland. 

The older ones among us, who had been with the regiment from the 
beginning, were deeply moved as we stood on this sacred spot where we 
had sworn ‘Loyalty and Duty unto Death.’ 

Three years ago the regiment had taken this position by storm; now it 
was called upon to defend it in a grueling struggle. 

With an artillery bombardment that lasted three weeks, the English 
prepared for their great offensive in Flanders. There the spirits of the dead 
seemed to live again. The regiment dug itself into the mud, clung to its 
shell-holes and craters, neither flinching nor wavering. Our numbers grew 
steadily smaller, until finally the British launched their attack on 31 July 
1917. 

We were relieved in the beginning of August. 

The regiment had dwindled down to a few companies, who staggered 
back, mud-crusted, more like ghosts than human beings. Besides a few 
hundred meters of shell-holes, death was the only reward that the English 
gained. 

Now, in the autumn of 1918, we stood for the third time on the ground 
we had stormed in 1914. The village of Comines, which formerly had 
served us as a base, was now within the fighting zone. Although little had 
changed in the surrounding battlefield, the men became different. They 
now talked ‘politics.’ Like everywhere else, the poison from home was 
having its effect here also. The young recruits succumbed to it 
completely—they came directly from home. 


7.11 POISONED BY MUSTARD GAS 


During the night of October 13-14, the British opened an attack with 
gas on the front, south of Ypres. They used mustard gas, whose effect was 
unknown to us, at least from personal experience. I would experience it 


217 


MEIN KAMPF 


that very night. On a hill south of Wervick, in the evening of October 13, 
we were subjected for several hours to a heavy bombardment with gas 
bombs, which continued throughout the night with more or less intensity. 
About midnight, a number of us were put out of action—some forever. 
Towards morning, I also began to feel pain. It increased with every quarter 
of an hour; and at about 7:00 my eyes were scorching as I staggered back 
and delivered the last dispatch that I would carry in this war. 

A few hours later, my eyes were like glowing coals, and all was 
darkness around me. 

I was sent to a hospital at Pasewalk in Pomerania, and it was there that 
I had to experience—the Revolution! 

For a long time, there was something in the air that was indefinable 
and repulsive. People were saying that something was bound to happen 
within the next few weeks, although I couldn’t imagine what this meant. 
First I thought of a strike, similar to the one that took place in spring. 
Unfavorable rumors were constantly coming from the Navy, which was 
said to be in a state of ferment. But this seemed to be the fanciful creation 
of a few isolated malcontents. At the hospital, they were all talking about 
the end of the war and hoping that this was not far off, but no one counted 
on anything immediately. I wasn’t able to read the newspapers. 

In November, the general tension increased. 

Then one day, disaster broke upon us suddenly and without warning. 
Sailors came in trucks and proclaimed the revolution. A few Jewish youth 
were the ‘leaders’ in that combat for the ‘Liberty, Beauty, and Dignity’ of 
our national being. Not one of them saw active service at the front. By way 
of a so-called ‘hospital for venereal disease,’ these three Orientals had been 
sent back home. Now their red rags were being raised here.® 

After a few days, I began to feel somewhat better. The burning pain in 
my eye sockets diminished. Gradually I was able to distinguish the rough 
outlines of my immediate surroundings. And I allowed myself to hope that 


8 It’s unclear to which “few” or “three” Jews Hitler is referring. Many Jews were 
active in the German revolt, as with other revolutions throughout Europe at that 
time. Prominent among the Jewish leaders of the Social Democrats were Otto 
Landesberg, Eduard Bernstein, and Rudolf Hilferding. The primary agitator, 
though, was the Independent Social Democratic Party (USPD), which was 
dominated by Jews: Kurt Eisner, Rosa Luxemburg, Hugo Haase, Karl 
Liebknecht (half-Jewish), Leo Jogiches, Karl Radek, Alexander Parvus, Ernst 
Toller, Gustav Landauer, and Erich Muehsam. For a detailed account of the 
Jewish role in the revolution, see Dalton (2013, 2014). 


218 


CHAPTER 7 


I would at least recover my sight sufficiently to be able to take up some 
profession later on. But it was out of the question that I might ever draw 
again. In any case, I was on the way to recovery when the monstrous hour 
arrived. 

My first thought was that this outbreak of high treason was only a local 
affair. I tried to encourage this belief among my comrades. My Bavarian 
hospital friends were particularly responsive to this. Their mood was 
anything but ‘revolutionary.’ I couldn’t imagine this madness breaking out 
in Munich; loyalty to the House of Wittelsbach was, after all, stronger than 
the will of a few Jews. And so I couldn’t help but believe that this was 
merely a local revolt by the Navy, and that it would be suppressed within 
the next few days. 


7.12 ‘REPUBLIC’ 


With the next few days came the most terrible information of my life. 
The rumors grew more and more persistent. What I had taken as a local 
affair was in reality a general revolution. In addition to this, shameful news 
came from the front. They wanted to capitulate. Was such a thing possible? 

On November 10 the local pastor gave a short address at the hospital; 
now we learned the whole story. 

I was in a state of extreme agitation as I listened to the address. The 
reverend old gentleman seemed to be trembling as he informed us that the 
House of Hohenzollern would no longer wear the imperial crown. The 
Fatherland had become a ‘Republic,’ and we should pray to the Almighty 
to grant us his blessing in the new order of things and to not abandon our 
people in the days to come. In delivering his speech, he couldn’t do more 
than briefly express appreciation to the royal house, its services to 
Pomerania, to Prussia, indeed, to the whole of the German Fatherland, 
and—here he began to weep. A feeling of profound dismay fell upon the 
people in that little hall, and I don’t think there was a single dry eye in the 
crowd. 

As for myself, I broke down completely when the old gentleman tried 
to resume his story by informing us that we must now end this long war. 
The war was lost, he said, and we were at the mercy of the victor. The 
Fatherland would have to bear heavy burdens in the future. We were to 
accept the terms of the armistice, and trust in the magnanimity of our 
former enemies. It was impossible for me to stay and listen any longer. 


219 


MEIN KAMPF 


Darkness surrounded meas I staggered and stumbled back to my ward and 
buried my aching head into the blankets and pillow. 

I hadn’t cried since the day I stood beside my mother’s grave. Whenever 
fate dealt cruelly with me in my youth, my spirit of determination grew 
stronger. During all those long years of war, when death claimed many 
friends and comrades, it would have been almost sinful to have uttered a 
word of complaint—they died for Germany! And finally, in the last few days 
of that titanic struggle, when the waves of poison gas enveloped me and 
began to penetrate my eyes, and the thought of becoming permanently blind 
unnerved me, my voice of conscience cried out: ‘Miserable fellow, will you 
start howling when there are thousands of others whose lot is a hundred 
times worse than yours?’ And so I accepted my misfortune in silence, 
realizing that nothing else could be done, and that my personal suffering 
was nothing compared with the misfortune of the Fatherland. 


7.13 ALL SACRIFICE IN VAIN 


So all had been in vain. In vain all the sacrifices and privations; in vain 
the hunger and thirst for endless months; in vain those hours that we stuck 
to our posts even though mortal fear gripped our souls; and in vain the 
deaths of two million. Of those hundreds of thousands who set out with 
hearts full of faith in their Fatherland, and never retumed—shouldn’t their 
graves now open, so that the spirits of those heroes splattered with mud 
and blood may come home and take vengeance on those who had so 
despicably betrayed the greatest sacrifice that a human being can make for 
his country? Was it for this that the soldiers died in August and September 
1914? For this, that the volunteer regiments followed the old comrades in 
the autumn of the same year? For this, that those boys of 17 sank into the 
earth of Flanders? Was this the meaning of the sacrifice that German 
mothers made for their Fatherland when, with heavy hearts, they said 
goodbye to their sons who never returned? Has all this been done so that a 
gang of despicable criminals could lay their hands on the Fatherland? 

Was this why the German soldier struggled through sweltering heat 
and blinding snowstorm, enduring hunger and thirst and cold, fatigued from 
sleepless nights and endless marches? Was it for this that he lived through 
an inferno of artillery bombardments, gasping and choking during gas 
attacks, neither flinching nor faltering, but always thinking of his duty to 
defend the Fatherland against the enemy? 


220 


CHAPTER 7 


Certainly these heroes deserved a headstone: “Wanderer, when you 
come to Germany, tell those at home that we lie here, true to the Fatherland 
and faithful to our duty.” 

And at home? 

But—was this the only sacrifice that we had to consider? Was the 
Germany of the past less valuable? Did she not owe a certain duty to her 
own history? Were we still worthy to partake in the glory of the past? How 
could we justify this act to future generations? 

Despicable and degenerate criminals! 

The more I tried to gain some clarity on this monstrous event, the more 
my head burned with rage and shame. What was the pain in my eyes 
compared with this tragedy? 

The following days were terrible to bear, and the nights worse still. I 
knew that all was lost. Only fools, liars, or criminals could depend on the 
mercy of the enemy. During those nights, my hatred grew—hatred for the 
originators of this crime. 


7.14 DECISION TO ENTER POLITICS 


In the days that followed, my own fate became clear to me. I had to laugh 
at the thought of my personal future, which only recently was the cause of 
so much concern. Was it not ridiculous to build something on such a 
foundation? Finally, it became clear that the inevitable had happened, 
something that I had long feared, though I didn’t have the heart to believe it. 

Kaiser Wilhelm II was the first German Emperor to offer the hand of 
friendship to the Marxist leaders, not suspecting that they were scoundrels 
without honor. While they held the imperial hand in theirs, the other hand 
was already reaching for the dagger. 

There is no coming to agreement with the Jews, but rather only the 
hard ‘either-or.’ 

It was then that I decided to take up politics. 


° A variation on a saying by Herodotus, recalling a message inscribed in stone by 
the Greek defenders of Thermopylae. See Histories (7.228). 


221 


CHAPTER 8: 
THE BEGINNING OF MY 
POLITICAL ACTIVITY 


At the end of November 1918, I returned to Munich. I went to the 
replacement battalion of my regiment, which was now in the hands of the 
‘soldiers’ council.’ Their whole administration was quite repulsive to me, 
and so I decided to leave it as soon as possible. With my faithful war- 
comrade Ernst Schmiedt, I went to Traunstein and remained there until the 
camp was broken up. 

In March 1919 we were back again in Munich. 

The situation there was unsustainable; a further extension of the 
revolution was inevitable. Eisner’s death served only to hasten this 
development, and it finally led to a dictatorship of the councils—or, to put 
it more correctly, to a Jewish hegemony.' This tumed out to be transitory, 
but it was the original aim of those who had instigated the revolution. 

At that time, countless plans took shape in my mind. I spent days 
pondering about what could be done. Unfortunately, every project gave 
way before the hard fact that I was quite unknown and therefore didn’t have 
even the minimum requirements for effective action. Later on I will explain 
the reasons why I didn’t join any of the existing parties. 

As the new revolution of the Councils ran its course in Munich, my 
activities began to draw the ire of the Central Council. In the early morning 
of 27 April 1919, I was supposed to have been arrested. But the three 
fellows who came for me didn’t have the courage to face my rifle, and 
withdrew just as they had arrived. 

' Kurt Eisner (1867-1919) was a leading Jewish revolutionary of Bavaria. He 


temporarily took power in late 1918, but was killed in February 1919 by German 
soldiers who had reasserted control over the region. 


223 


MEIN KAMPF 


A few days after the liberation of Munich, I was ordered to appear 
before the inquiry commission that was set up in the 2nd Infantry Regiment 
for the purpose of watching revolutionary activities. 

That was my first more-or-less purely political activity. 

A few weeks later I received orders to attend a ‘course’ that was being 
given to members of the army. This course was meant to teach certain 
fundamental civic principles. For me, the advantage of this organization 
was that it gave me a chance to meet fellow soldiers who were of the same 
mind, and with whom I could discuss the actual situation. We were all more 
or less firmly convinced that Germany could not be saved from imminent 
disaster by those who had participated in the November treachery—which 
is to say, the Center and the Social Democrats. Also, the so-called 
Bourgeois National group couldn’t repair the damage that had been done, 
even if they had the best intentions. They lacked a number of prerequisites, 
without which such a task could never be successful. The years that 
followed justified the opinions that we held at that time. 


8.1 DISCUSSION ON THE FORMATION OF A NEW PARTY 


In our small circle, we discussed the project of forming a new party. 
The leading ideas that we then proposed were the same as those that were 
carried into effect later on, when the German Labor Party was founded. 
The name of the new movement that was to be founded should be such 
that, of itself, it would appeal to the masses. All our efforts would be vain 
and useless if this condition were lacking. And that was one reason why 
we chose the name ‘Social Revolutionary Party’; the social principles of 
our new organization were indeed revolutionary. 

But a more fundamental reason was the following: 

The attention that I gave to economic problems during my earlier years 
was more or less confined to considerations arising directly from social 
problems. Later this outlook broadened as I came to study the German 
alliance policy. This policy was largely the result of an erroneous valuation 
of the economic situation, together with a confused notion of the basis by 
which the future subsistence of the German people could be guaranteed. All 
these ideas were based on the principle that capital is exclusively the product 
of labor, and that therefore, just like labor, it was subject to all the factors 
that can restrict or promote human activity. Hence, from a national standpoint, 
the significance of capital depended on the greatness, freedom, and power 


224 


CHAPTER 8 


of the state, and hence of the nation. Furthermore, it’s this dependence alone 
that leads capital to promote the interests of the state and the nation, from an 
instinct of self-preservation and for the sake of its own development. This 
dependence of capital on the independent state would therefore compel 
capital to promote the freedom, power, strength, etc of the nation. 

On such principles, the attitude of the state towards capital would be 
relatively simple and clear. Its only object would be to make sure that capital 
remained subservient to the state and didn’t allocate to itself the right to 
dominate national interests. Thus its activities would be bound by the 
following two limits: on the one side, to assure a vital and independent national 
economy and, on the other, to safeguard the social rights of the workers. 


8.2 TWO TYPES OF CAPITAL 


Previously I didn’t clearly recognize the difference between capital that 
is purely the product of creative labor, and capital that is exclusively the 
result of financial speculation. Here I needed an inspiration to set my mind 
thinking in this direction; but that impulse had not appeared. 

The necessary inspiration now came from one of the men who lectured 
in the course I mentioned earlier. This was Gottfried Feder.’ 

For the first time in my life, I heard a discussion of the principles of 
international stock exchange capital and loan capital. 

After hearing Feder’s first lecture, the idea immediately came into my 
head that I had now found one of the most essential prerequisites for the 
founding of a new party. 

To my mind, Feder’s merit lay in the ruthlessly brutal way in which he 
described the double character of capital engaged in stock-exchange and loan 
transaction, exposing the fact that this capital is always dependent on the 
payment of interest. In fundamental questions, his statements were so full of 
common sense that his critics didn’t deny their theoretical soundness, but only 
whether it would be possible to put these ideas into practice. To me this seemed 
the strongest point in Feder’s teaching, though others considered it a weakness. 


2 Feder (1883-1941) was an economist by training, and one of the central 
founders of the National Socialist party. When Hitler came to power in 1933, 
Feder joined the government, quickly rising to the level of Reich commissioner. 
But by 1935 he had withdrawn from politics, preferring a university 
professorship in Berlin. He stayed there until his death in 1941, at age 58. 


225 


MEIN KAMPF 


8.3 THEORETICIAN AND POLITICIAN 


It isn’t the task of the theoretician to explain the various ways in which 
something can be put into practice. His task is to deal with the problem as 
such; he has to look to the end rather than the means. The important 
question is whether an idea is fundamentally correct, not whether it can be 
carried out. When a man whose task is to lay down the principles of a 
program or policy begins to busy himself with so-called ‘usefulness’ or 
‘reality’ instead of the absolute truth, his work will cease to be a guiding 
star to those who are looking for enlightenment. It will become a mere 
recipe for everyday life. The theoretician must consider only the goal; the 
politician must then strive for its fulfillment. The thought of the former 
will, therefore, be determined by eternal truths, whereas the activity of the 
latter must always be guided by the practical reality of the moment. 

The greatness of the one will depend on the absolute truth of his idea; 
whereas that of the other will depend on whether or not he correctly judges 
the given realities and their advantageous application. In this sense, the 
theoretical goal is his guiding star. The test of a politician’s greatness is the 
success of his plans and enterprises—in other words, his ability to reach 
his goal. Conversely, the theoretician’s final goal can never be reached; 
human thought may grasp truths and envision ends that it sees with crystal 
clarity, even though such ends can never be completely fulfilled because 
human nature is weak and imperfect. The more correct an idea is in the 
abstract, and therefore, the more powerful, the smaller the chance of putting 
it into practice—at least as far as this depends on human beings. The 
significance of a theoretician doesn’t depend on the practical success of his 
plans, but rather on their absolute truth and the influence they exert on the 
progress of humanity. 

If it were otherwise, the founders of religions could never be considered 
the greatest men who have ever lived, because their moral aims would 
never be completely or even partially carried out in practice. Even the 
Religion of Love? is really no more than a faint reflection of the will of its 
sublime founder. But its significance lies in the orientation that it attempted 
to give to human civilization, ethics, and morality. 

This vast difference between the functions of a theoretician and a 
politician is the reason why the necessary qualifications for both functions 
are rarely ever found in the same person. This applies especially to the so- 


3 That is, Christianity. 


226 


CHAPTER 8 


called ‘successful’ politician of the smaller kind, whose activity is indeed 
hardly more than practicing ‘the art of the possible,’ as Bismarck modestly 
defined politics in general. If such a politician resolutely avoids great ideas, 
his success will be all the easier to attain; and it will be quicker and more 
tangible. By reason of this very fact, however, such success is doomed to 
futility, and sometimes doesn’t even survive the death of its author. 
Generally speaking, the work of politicians is insignificant for following 
generation, because their temporary success is based on the expediency of 
avoiding all truly great and profound problems and ideas—the very things 
that would have been valuable to future generations. 

To pursue ideals that will still be of value and significance for the future is 
generally not a very profitable undertaking. He who follows such a course is 
only very rarely understood by the masses, who find beer and milk a more 
persuasive index of political values than far-sighted plans for the future—which 
are realized only much later, and whose benefits are reaped only by posterity. 

Because of a certain vanity—which is always a cousin of stupidity— 
the general run of politicians will always avoid those schemes for the future 
that are very difficult to put into practice. And they will practice this 
avoidance so as to not lose the immediate favor of the mob. The success 
and importance of such politicians belong exclusively to the present; they 
will be of no consequence for the future. But that doesn’t worry small- 
minded people, who are quite content with momentary results. 

The position of the theoretician is quite different. The importance of 
his work must always be judged from the standpoint of the future. He is 
frequently described by the word weltfremd, or unworldly. While the art of 
the politician is the art of the possible, the theoretician belongs to those 
who are said to please the gods, only because they demand the impossible. 
Such men will always have to renounce present-day fame; but if their ideas 
are immortal, posterity will grant them its reward. 

Over long spans of human progress, it may occasionally happen that 
the politician and theoretician are one. The more intimate this union, the 
greater the obstacles that the activity of the politician will have to face. 
Such a man doesn’t labor for the purpose of satisfying demands that are 
obvious to every shopkeeper, but he reaches out towards ends that can be 
understood only by the few. His life is thus torn apart by hatred and love. 
The protest of his contemporaries, who don’t understand him, is in conflict 
with the recognition of posterity, for whom he also works. 


227 


MEIN KAMPF 


8.4 MARATHON RUNNERS OF HISTORY 


The greater the work that a man does for the future, the less he will be 
appreciated by his contemporaries. His struggle will be all harder, and his 
success rarer. If, in the course of centuries, such a man appears who is blessed 
with success, then, towards the end of his days, he may have a faint vision 
of his future fame. But such great men are only the marathon runners of 
history. The laurels of contemporary fame are only for the brow of the dying 
hero. 

The great warriors are those who fight for their ideas and ideals, despite 
the fact that they receive no recognition from their contemporaries. They are 
the men whose memories will be enshrined in the hearts of future generations. 
It almost seems as if each person felt a duty to atone for the wrongs 
committed against such great men. Their lives and their work are then studied 
with admiring gratitude and emotion. Especially in dark days of distress, such 
men have the power to heal broken hearts and elevate despairing souls. 

To this group belong not only the genuinely great statesmen butall the 
great reformers as well. Beside Frederick the Great we have such men as 
Martin Luther and Richard Wagner. 


8.5 FIGHT AGAINST INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CAPITAL 


When I heard Gottfried Feder’s first lecture on ‘breaking interest- 
slavery,’ I understood immediately that here was a truth of transcendental 
importance for the future of the German people. The absolute separation 
of stock exchange capital from the national economy would make it 
possible to oppose the internationalization of the German economy without 
at the same time attacking capital per se. Doing so would jeopardize the 
foundations of our national independence. I clearly saw what was 
developing in Germany, and I realized then that the hardest battle we would 
have to fight would not be against the enemy nations, but against 
international capital. In Feder’s speech I found an effective rallying-cry for 
our coming struggle. 

Here, again, later events proved how correct our impression was. The 
fools among our bourgeois politicians don’t laugh at us now. Even they 
now see—insofar as they are not deliberate liars—that international stock- 
exchange capital was not only the chief instigator for the war, but that now 
when the fighting has ended, it turns the peace into a hell. 


228 


CHAPTER 8 


The struggle against international finance capital and loan-capital has 
become one of the most important points in the program of the German 
nation’s fight for economic independence and freedom. 

Regarding the objections raised by so-called practical people, the 
following answer must suffice: All fears concerning the terrible economic 
consequences that would follow the abolition of interest-capital slavery are 
superfluous. In the first place, the economic principles followed thus far 
have proven nearly fatal to the interests of the German people. This 
situation recalls similar advice once given by experts in earlier times— 
such as the Bavarian Medical College, on the question of introducing 
railroads. None of the fears expressed by that august body of experts were 
realized. Those who travelled in the coaches of the new ‘steam horse’ didn’t 
get dizzy. Those who looked on didn’t become ill. And the board fences 
that were erected to conceal the new invention were eventually taken down. 
Only those board fences that obscured the vision of the so-called ‘experts’ 
were preserved for posterity. 

In the second place, the following must be noted: Any idea may be a 
source of danger if it is seen as an end in itself, when really it’s only the 
means to an end. For me and all true National Socialists, there is only one 
doctrine: People and Fatherland. 

We have to fight to safeguard the existence and reproduction of our 
race and people, the sustenance of our children, the purity of our blood, 
and the freedom and independence of the Fatherland. Only then may our 
people fulfill the mission assigned to them by the creator of the universe. 

All ideas and ideals, all teaching and all knowledge, must serve these 
ends. Everything must be examined from this viewpoint and turned to 
practical uses, or else discarded. Thus a theory can never become a mere 
dead doctrine, since everything must serve life. 

Thus it was that Gottfried Feder’s conclusions caused me to make a 
fundamental study of a question with which I had previously not been very 
familiar. 

I began to study again, and thus it was that I came to truly understand 
the substance and purpose of the life-work of the Jew Karl Marx. His 
Capital became intelligible to me now for the first time.* I now exactly 
understood the Social Democrats’ fight against national economics—a fight 
that was to prepare the ground for the hegemony of a true international and 
stock exchange capital. 


4 Marx’s book Das Kapital (‘Capital’) was initially published in 1867. 
229 


MEIN KAMPF 


8.6 THE ‘EDUCATIONAL OFFICER’ 


In another direction too, this course of lectures had important 
consequences for me. 

One day I asked to speak. Another participant felt obligated to break a 
lance for the Jews, and entered into a lengthy defense of them. This aroused 
my opposition. An overwhelming majority supported my views. The 
consequence of it all was that, a few days later, I was assigned to a regiment 
then stationed at Munich, and given a position there as a so-called 
‘educational officer.’ 

At that time, the discipline of the troops was rather weak. It was still 
suffering from the after-effects of the period when the soldiers’ councils 
were in control. Only gradually and carefully was it possible to replace 
‘voluntary obedience’—a cute name given by Kurt Eisner’s pig-sty of a 
regime—with a spirit of military discipline and subordination. The soldiers 
had to be taught to think and feel in a national and patriotic way. In these 
two directions lay my future line of action. 

I began my work with the greatest enthusiasm and love. Here I was 
presented with an opportunity to speak before quite a large audience. I was 
now able to confirm what I had previously merely felt: I could ‘speak.’ My 
voice had become so much better that I could be clearly understood in all 
parts of the small squadron hall. 

No task could have been more pleasing to me than this. Now, before 
being discharged, I was in a position to render useful service to an 
institution that was infinitely dear to my heart: the army. 

I can now say that my talks were successful. During the course of my 
lectures, I led hundreds and even thousands of my fellow countrymen back 
to their people and Fatherland. I ‘nationalized’ these troops, and in doing 
so I helped to restore general discipline. 

Here again I made the acquaintance of several like-minded comrades, 
who later came to form the core of the new movement. 


230 


CHAPTER 9: 
THE “GERMAN 
WORKERS’ PARTY" 


One day I received an order from my superiors to investigate the nature 
of an apparently political association. It called itself “The German Workers’ 
Party,” and was soon to hold a meeting at which Gottfried Feder would 
speak.' I was ordered to attend this meeting and report on the situation. 

The curiosity of the army authorities toward political parties can be 
very well understood. The revolution gave the soldiers the right to take an 
active part in politics, and it was particularly those with the least experience 
who made the most of this right. But when the Center and the Social 
Democratic parties were forced to recognize that the soldiers’ sympathies 
had turned away from the revolutionary parties and towards the national 
movement and reawakening, they felt obligated to withdraw the right to 
vote from the army and to forbid it all political activity. 

The fact that the Center and Marxism adopted this policy was instructive, 
because if they hadn’t thus curtailed ‘civil rights’-—as they called the political 
rights of the soldiers after the revolution—the ‘November State’ would have 
been overthrown within a few years, and thus the dishonor and disgrace of 
the nation wouldn’t have been prolonged. At that time, the soldiers were on 
the verge of ridding the nation of the bloodsuckers and henchmen who served 
the cause of the Entente within our country. But the fact that the so-called 
‘national’ parties voted enthusiastically for the doctrinaire policy of the 
November criminals also helped to render the army ineffective as an 
instrument of national restoration; it thus showed once again where men might 
be led by the purely doctrinaire ideas accepted by these most gullible people. 


' Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, or DAP. This would be the forerunner of the National 
Socialist DAP, or NSDAP. To its detractors, it was the ““Nazi” party. 


231 


MEIN KAMPF 


The bourgeois middle classes became so senile that they sincerely 
believed the army could once again become what it had previously been, 
namely, a stronghold of German power. The Center and Marxism intended 
only to extract the poisonous fang of nationalism, without which an army 
must always remain just a police force, and can never be a military 
organization capable of fighting against the enemy. This truth was amply 
proved by subsequent events. 

Or did our ‘national politicians’ believe that the development of our army 
could be other than national? This might have been possible, and could be 
explained by the fact that, during the war, they weren’t soldiers but talkers; 
in other words, parliamentarians. As such, they didn’t have the slightest idea 
of what was in the hearts of those men who remembered the greatness of 
their own past, and that they were once the best soldiers in the world. 


9.1 THE “GERMAN WORKERS’ PARTY” 


I decided to attend the meeting of this party, which had previously been 
entirely unknown to me. 

When I arrived that evening in the ‘guest room’ of the former 
Sternecker Brewery in Munich, I found approximately 20 to 25 people 
present, most of them belonging to the lower classes. 

The theme of Feder’s lecture was already familiar to me, so I could 
therefore focus my attention on the organization itself. 

The impression was neither good nor bad—a new organization, just 
like any other. In those days, everyone felt called upon to form a new party 
whenever he was unhappy with the course of events and lost confidence in 
the existing parties. Thus it was that new associations sprang up all around, 
only to disappear just as quickly. Generally speaking, the founders of such 
associations didn’t have the slightest idea of what it means to bring together 
a number of people for the formation of a party or a movement. Therefore, 
these associations disappeared because of their utter lack of anything like 
an adequate grasp of the necessities of the situation. 

My opinion of the “German Workers’ Party” was no different. I was 
glad when Feder finally came to a close. I had observed enough and was 
just about to leave when an open discussion period was announced; I 
decided to stay. At first this was just more of the same, when suddenly a 
‘professor’ began to speak. He opened by throwing doubt on the accuracy 
of what Feder had said, and then—after Feder’s able reply—the professor 


232 


CHAPTER 9 


suddenly began arguing on what he called ‘the basis of facts.’ He 
recommended that the young party take up ‘secession’ from ‘Prussia.’ In a 
most self-assured way, this man kept insisting that German-Austria should 
join Bavaria, and that the peace would then function much better...and 
other nonsense. At this point, I felt bound to ask for permission to speak 
and to tell the learned gentleman what I thought. As a result, and even 
before I finished, he slipped out of the hall like a wet poodle. While I spoke, 
the audience listened with an astonished expression on their faces. When I 
was just about to say good night to the assembly and leave, a man came 
after me quickly and introduced himself (I didn’t quite catch his name). He 
placed a little booklet in my hand, which was obviously a political 
pamphlet, and asked me very urgently to read it. 

I was quite pleased; in this way, I could come to know about this 
association without having to attend its tiresome meetings. Moreover, this 
apparent workman made a good impression on me.’ I then left the hall. 

At that time, I was living in one of the barracks of the 2"4 Infantry 
Regiment. I had a little room that still bore the unmistakable traces of the 
revolution. During the day I was mostly out, with the 41 Rifle Regiment, or 
otherwise attending meetings or lectures held elsewhere. I spent only the night 
in my room. Since I usually woke up about 5:00 every morning, I got into the 
habit of amusing myself by watching little mice playing around in my small 
room. I placed a few pieces of hard bread or crust on the floor and watched 
the funny little creatures playing around and enjoying themselves with these 
delicacies. I had suffered so much poverty in my own life that I well knew 
whathunger was, and I could thus imagine the pleasure of these little creatures. 

Thenext morning, around 5:00 AM, I was fully awake in bed, watching 
the mice playing and vying with each other. Since I couldn’t sleep, I suddenly 
remembered the booklet that the worker had given me. I began to read. It 
was a small pamphlet, of which this worker was the author. He described 
how his mind had thrown off the shackles of Marxist and trade-union 
phraseology, and that he came back to nationalist ideals. That was the reason 
why he had entitled his little book: My Political Awakening? The pamphlet 
grabbed my attention the moment I began to read, and I read it with interest 
to the end. The process described was similar to that which I had experienced 
in my own case, 12 years earlier. Unconsciously, my own development came 


2 The worker turned out to be Anton Drexler, one of the original founders of the 
DAP. 


3 Mein Politisches Erwachen, by Anton Drexler (1920; E. Boepple, Munich). 
233 


MEIN KAMPF 


again to mind. During that day, my thoughts returned several times to what 
I had read; but eventually I forgot about it. A week or so later, however, I 
received a postcard that informed me, to my astonishment, that I had been 
admitted to the DAP. I was asked to reply to this communication and to attend 
a meeting of the Party Committee the next Wednesday. 

This method of ‘winning’ members amazed me, and I didn’t know 
whether to be angry or laugh. I had no intention of joining any existing 
party, but wanted to found one of my own. It was presumptuous of them to 
ask and, for me, completely out of the question. 

I was about to send a written reply when curiosity got the better of me, 
and I decided to attend the gathering on the assigned date, so that I might 
explain my principles to these gentlemen in person. 


9.2 THE ‘COMMITTEE MEETING’ 


Wednesday came. The tavern in which the meeting was to take place 
was the Alte Rosenbad in the Hermstrasse—a run-down place with very 
few guests. This wasn’t very surprising in 1919, when the menus of even 
the larger restaurants were only very modest and scanty. But I had never 
before heard of this business. 

I went through the badly-lighted guest room, where not a single guest 
was to be seen, and opened the door to the back room; there I found the 
‘session.’ In the dim light of a grimy gas lamp, I could see four young 
people sitting around a table, one of them the author of the pamphlet. He 
greeted me cordially and welcomed me as a new member of the DAP. 

I was somewhat taken aback. I was then informed that the ‘national 
chairman’ had not yet arrived; I decided that I would withhold my own 
ideas for the time being. Finally the chairman appeared. He was the same 
chairman as in the Sternecker Brewery, when Feder spoke. 

My curiosity was growing, and I sat waiting for what was to come. 
Now at least I learned the names of the gentlemen. The chairman of the 
‘national organization’ was a certain Herr Harrer;* and the leader of the 
Munich district was Anton Drexler. 

The minutes of the previous meeting were read out, and a vote of 
confidence in the secretary was passed. Then came the treasurer’s report. 
4 Karl Harrer (1890-1926) was a journalist and early founder of the DAP. He 
parted ways with Hitler not long after their initial meeting, and died soon 
thereafter at age 36. 


234 


CHAPTER 9 


The association possessed a total of seven marks and 50 pfennigs, 
whereupon the treasurer was assured that he had the confidence of the 
members. This was now inserted in the minutes. Then the chairman’s replies 
to anumber of letters were read: first, to a letter received from Kiel, then to 
one from Diisseldorf, and finally to one from Berlin. Everyone expressed 
approval. Then the incoming letters were read: one from Berlin, one from 
Diisseldorf, and one from Kiel—all resulting in great satisfaction. This was 
taken as the best and most obvious sign of the growing importance of the 
DAP. And then—there followed a long discussion of the replies to be given. 

Terrible, terrible! This was tedious bureaucracy of the worst sort. And 
was I to join such a club? 

Next came the question of new members—that is to say, the question 
of my capture. 

I now began to ask questions. But I found that, apart from a few general 
principles, there was nothing: no program, no pamphlet, nothing at all in 
print, no membership cards, not even a party stamp; only clear good faith 
and good intentions. 

I no longer felt like laughing—for what else was all this but a typical 
sign of the most complete helplessness and total despair of all political 
parties, their programs, and their activities? 

The feeling that induced those few young men to join in what seemed 
such a ridiculous enterprise was nothing but the call of an inner voice. It 
told them, more intuitively than consciously, that the whole party system 
as it existed was incapable of raising up the German nation or repairing the 
inner wounds. I quickly read through the list of principles that formed the 
party platform. These were stated on typewritten sheets. Here again I found 
evidence of a spirit of longing and searching, but no sign whatsoever of a 
knowledge of the conflict that had to be fought. 

I myself had experienced the feelings that inspired those people: it was 
the longing for a movement that would be more than a party, in the usual 
sense of that word. 

When I returned to the barracks that evening, I had formed a definite 
opinion of that association. 

I was facing the hardest question of my life: Should I join this party, 
or should I decline? 


235 


MEIN KAMPF 


9.3 A FINAL DECISION 


Rationally, every consideration urged me to decline; but my feelings 
troubled me. The more I tried to prove to myself how senseless this club 
was, on the whole, the more my feelings inclined me to favor it. 

In the days to follow, I was restless. 

I began to consider all the pros and cons. I had long ago decided to 
take an active part in politics. It was clear that I could do so only through 
anew movement; but I had previously lacked the impulse to take concrete 
action. I’m not one of those people who will begin something one day and 
give it up the next, just for the sake of something new. That was the main 
reason why it was so difficult for me to decide to join such an organization. 
This would have to be the fulfillment of my goals, or else I shouldn’t do it 
at all. I knew that such a decision would bind me forever, and that there 
could be no turning back. This was no idle game, but rather a serious and 
ardent cause. Even then I had an instinctive revulsion against people who 
took up everything, but never carried anything through to the end. I loathed 
these jacks-of-all-trades, and considered the activities of such people to be 
worse than doing nothing at all. 

Fate itself now seemed to point the way. I would never have entered one 
of the big existing parties; I’ll explain my reasons for this later on. This absurd 
little group, with its handful of members, seemed to have the unique advantage 
of not yet being frozen into an ‘organization.’ It still offered a chance for real 
personal activity on the part of the individual. Here it might still be possible 
to do some effective work; and, as the movement was still small, one could 
all the easier give it the proper shape. Here it was still possible to determine 
the character of the movement, the aims to be achieved, and the road to be 
taken; all of this would have been impossible in the big parties. 

The longer I reflected on the situation, the more my opinion developed 
that just such a small movement could best serve to prepare the way for a 
national resurgence. This could never be done by the political parliamentary 
parties, which were too firmly attached to obsolete ideas or had an interest 
in supporting the new regime. What had to be proclaimed here was a new 
worldview, and not a new election slogan. 

It was, however, infinitely more difficult to turn this intention into 
reality. 

What qualifications did I bring to this task? 

The fact that I was poor and without resources could, in my opinion, 
be the easiest to bear. But the fact that I was utterly unknown raised a more 


236 


CHAPTER 9 


difficult problem. I was only one of the millions that Chance allowed to 
exist, whom even their next-door neighbors will not consent to know. And 
another difficulty arose from my lack of schooling. 

The so-called ‘intellectuals’ still look down with limitless disdain on 
anyone who hasn’t been through the prescribed schools, and had the 
necessary knowledge pumped into them. The question has never been, 
What can a man do?, but rather, What has he learned? ‘Educated’ people 
look upon any idiot who is plastered with diplomas as superior to the ablest 
young man who lacks these precious documents. I could therefore easily 
imagine how this ‘educated’ world would receive me, and I was wrong 
only insofar as I then believed men to be better than they proved to be, in 
the harsh light of reality. Because they are this way, the few exceptions 
stand out all the more brightly. I learned more and more to distinguish 
between the eternal students and those who are the true men of ability. 

After two days of careful brooding and reflection, I became convinced 
that I must take the step. 

It was the most fateful decision of my life. 

There was and could be no turning back. 

Thus I registered as a member of the German Worker’s Party, and 
received a provisional membership card, with the number: seven. 


237 


CHAPTER 10: 
CAUSES OF THE 
COLLAPSE 


The depth of a fall is always measured by the difference between the 
level of a body’s original position and that in which it now exists. The same 
holds good for nations and states. The matter of greatest importance here 
is the height of the original level, or rather the greatest height that was 
attained before the descent began. Only that which is capable of 
extraordinary heights can experience a profound decline or collapse. The 
collapse of the Reich! was so difficult and terrible because it had fallen 
from a height that can hardly be imagined in these days of misery and 
humiliation. ‘ 

The Reich was founded in circumstances of such dazzling splendor 
that the whole nation had become entranced. Following an unparalleled 
series of victories, an empire was born for the children and grandchildren 
of the heroes. Whether they were conscious of it or not doesn’t matter. What 
matters is that the Germans all felt that this empire had not been brought 
into existence by a series of parliamentary maneuvers, but by reason of the 
noblest circumstances. Its foundations were laid not amidst parliamentary 
debates but with the thunder and boom of war along the front that encircled 
Paris. It was thus that an act of statesmanship was accomplished whereby 
the German princes and people established the future Reich, and restored 
the symbol of the imperial crown. Bismarck’s state was not founded on 


' Throughout Mein Kampf, Hitler uses the word Reich to refer to what he would 
later call the ‘Second Reich,’ or the reign of Hohenzollerns (1871-1918), 
initiated by Otto von Bismarck. The First Reich was the Holy Roman Empire, 
which lasted from 962 to 1806. The phrase ‘Third Reich’ was coined in 1923, 
and only later, after 1933, was appropriated by the National Socialists. 


239 


MEIN KAMPF 


treason and assassination by deserters and slackers but by the regiments 
that had fought at the front. 

This unique birth and baptism of fire surrounded the Reich with a halo 
of historical splendor such as only the oldest states—seldom—could do. 

And what an ascent now began! 

Autonomy guaranteed the daily bread. The nation became rich in 
people and in worldly goods. The honor of the state—and thereby of the 
people as a whole—were secured and protected by an army that was the 
most striking witness of the difference between this new Reich and the old 
German Confederation. 


10.1 THE SIGN OF COLLAPSE 


The downfall of the Reich and the German people has been so 
profound that they all seem to have been dumb-struck and rendered 
incapable of feeling its significance. People can scarcely remember the 
former heights, whose greatness and majesty are in such contrast to our 
present misery. 

It is therefore understandable that people are so dazed by the sublime 
that they forget to look for the signs of the great collapse, which must 
certainly have been present in some form or other. 

Naturally this applies only to those for whom Germany was more than 
merely a source of income. These are the only people able to feel the 
present conditions as really catastrophic, whereas the others have 
considered these conditions as the fulfillment of something they had long 
sought and wished for. 

The signs of future collapse were certainly there in those earlier days, 
although very few made any attempt to draw a practical lesson from them. 

But today this is more necessary than ever. 

Just as bodily diseases can be cured only when their origin has been 
diagnosed, so too with political disease. It’s obvious that the external 
symptoms of any disease can be more readily detected than its internal 
causes; these strike the eye more easily. This is also the reason why so many 
people recognize only external effects and mistake them for causes. Indeed 
they will sometimes try to deny the existence of such causes. And that’s 
why the majority of people among us recognize the German collapse only 
in terms of the prevailing economic distress and its consequences. Almost 
everyone has to carry his share of this burden, and that’s why each one 


240 


CHAPTER 10 


looks on the economic catastrophe as the cause of the present deplorable 
state of affairs. The broad masses of people see little of the cultural, 
political, and moral background of this collapse. Many of them completely 
lack both the necessary feeling and intellect to understand it. 

That the masses should hold such a view is quite understandable. But 
the fact that intelligentsia regard the German collapse primarily as an 
“economic catastrophe,’ and consequently that a cure requires an economic 
solution, seems to me the reason why any recovery has been thus far 
impossible. No improvement can be brought about until it is understood 
that economics play only a second- or third-rate role, while the primary 
factors are politics, morality, and blood. Only when this is understood will 
it be possible to understand the causes of the present evil, and thus to find 
the ways and means of curing them. 

Therefore the question of why Germany really collapsed is one of 
decisive importance, especially for a political movement that aims at 
overcoming this defeat. 

In scrutinizing the past, we must be careful not to be overly impressed 
by external results that readily strike the eye, while ignoring the less visible 
causes of these results. 


10.2 THE CAUSES OF COLLAPSE 


The most facile, and therefore the most widely-accepted way of 
accounting for the present misfortune is to say that it’s the result of a lost 
war, and that the World War was therefore the real cause. 

Probably there are many who honestly believe this nonsense, but there 
are many more in whose mouths this is a lie and a conscious falsehood. 
This applies to all those who are now feeding at the government troughs. 
For didn’t the prophets of the revolution repeatedly declare to the people 
that the outcome of the war would be immaterial to the great masses? On 
the contrary, didn’t they solemnly assure the public that it was ‘big capital’ 
that was principally interested in a victorious outcome of this gigantic 
struggle—but never the German people or the German workers? Indeed 
didn’t these apostles of world conciliation habitually assert that, far from 
any German downfall, the opposite was bound to take place: namely, that 
the German nation would be resurrected, once ‘militarism’ had been 
destroyed? Didn’t these circles sing the praises of the Entente, and did they 
not also lay the whole blame for the bloody struggle on Germany? Without 


241 


MEIN KAMPF 


this explanation, would they have been able to put forth the theory that a 
military defeat would have no political consequences for the German 
people? Wasn’t the whole revolution dressed up in gala colors as preventing 
a victory of the German flag, and thus that the German people would be 
assured of freedom, both at home and abroad? 

Isn’t that so, you miserable, lying scoundrels? 

It takes a typically Jewish impudence to proclaim the defeat of the army 
as the cause of the collapse. Indeed, the Berlin Vorwdrts, that organ and 
mouthpiece of sedition, wrote that the German nation should not be 
permitted to bring home its banner triumphantly! 

And yet they attribute our collapse to this? 

Of course it would be pointless to argue with these forgetful liars. I 
would waste no further words on them, were it not for the fact that there 
are many thoughtless people who parrot this nonsense without being 
necessarily inspired by any evil motives. But this discussion is also meant 
for our fighting followers, given that nowadays one’s spoken words are 
often twisted in their meaning. 

The assertion that the loss of the war was the cause of the German 
collapse can best be answered as follows: 

It is admittedly a fact that the loss of the war was of tragic importance 
for the future of our Fatherland. But that loss was not in itself a cause. It 
was rather the consequence of other causes. It was clear to every straight 
thinker that a disastrous ending to this life-or-death conflict would involve 
catastrophic consquences. But unfortunately there were also people whose 
reasoning seemed to fail them at that critical moment. And there were 
others who had first questioned that truth and then denied it altogether. And 
there were people who, after their secret desire was fulfilled, were suddenly 
faced with the catastrophe that they themselves helped to bring about. They 
are guily of the collapse—and not the lost war, though they now want to 
attribute everything to this. 

As a matter of fact, the loss of the war was a result of their activities 
and not of ‘bad’ leadership, as they now would like to maintain. Our 
enemies were not cowards. They also knew how to die. From the very first 
day of the war, they outnumbered the German army, and the arsenals and 
armament factories of the whole world were at their disposal for the 
replenishment of military equipment. Indeed, it is universally admitted that 
the German victories that were steadily won during four years of warfare 
against the whole world were due to superior leadership, apart of course 
from the heroism of the troops. This cannot be denied. The organization 


242 


CHAPTER 10 


and leadership of the German army was the mightiest thing that the world 
had ever seen. Any evident shortcomings were humanly unavoidable. 

The collapse of that army was not the cause of our present distress. It 
was itself the consequence of other crimes. But this consequence in tum 
ushered in a further collapse, which was more visible. 

That this was true can be shown as follows: 

Must a military defeat necessarily lead to such a complete overthrow 
of the state and the nation? Since when has this been the result of an 
unlucky war? As a matter of fact, are nations ever ruined by a lost war, and 
by that alone? 

The answer to this question can be briefly stated: military defeats are 
the result of internal decay, cowardice, lack of character, and in short, 
unworthiness. If these were not the causes, then a military defeat would 
lead to a national resurgence, and bring the nation to a higher pitch of effort. 
A military defeat is not the tombstone of national life. 

History offers many examples to confirm the truth of that statement. 

Unfortunately, Germany’s military defeat wasn’t an undeserved 
catastrophe, but a well-merited punishment that was in the nature of an 
eternal retribution. We more than deserved this defeat. It represented the 
greatest external sign of decay among a series of internal symptoms, which, 
although they were visible, weren’t recognized by the majority of the 
people, who are like ostriches and see only what they want to see. 


10.3 EVERY THIRD GERMAN IS A TRAITOR 


Let’s examine the symptoms that were evident at the time that the 
German people accepted this defeat. Isn’t it true that, in several circles, the 
Fatherland’s misfortunes were even welcomed with a shameless joy? Who 
could act in such a way without thereby earning the right to be punished? 
Weren’t there people who even went further and boasted that they had 
caused the front to waver? And these things weren’t done by the enemy— 
no, no—but rather our own countrymen! 

Did they suffer misfortune unjustly? Was there ever a case in history 
where a people declared itself guilty of a war? And that, even against better 
judgment and better knowledge! 

No, and again no. From the way that the German nation reacted to its 
defeat, we can see that the real cause of our collapse must be sought 
elsewhere, and not in the purely military loss of a few positions or the 


243 


MEIN KAMPF 


failure of an offensive. For if the front had given way and thus brought 
about a national disaster, then the German nation would have accepted the 
defeat in quite another spirit. They would have borne the subsequent 
misfortune with clenched teeth, or they would have been overwhelmed by 
grief. Regret and fury would have filled their hearts against an enemy who 
was given victory by a chance event or by the will of fate. And in that case, 
the nation, following the example of the Roman Senate, would have greeted 
the defeated divisions on their return and expressed their thanks for the 
sacrifices that were made, and would have requested them not to lose faith 
in the Reich.? Even the capitulation would have been signed under the sway 
of calm reason, while the heart would have beaten in the hope of a coming 
resurrection. 

This is the reception that would have been given to a military defeat 
due only to the adverse decree of fate. There would have been neither 
laughing nor dancing. There would have been no boasting of cowardice, 
nor any honoring of defeat. The returning troops wouldn’t have been 
mocked, and the banner wouldn’t have been dragged in the mud. But above 
all, we would never have had that disgraceful state of affairs in which a 
British officer, Colonel Repington, declared with scorn: “Every third 
German is a traitor!” No, this plague would never have become a veritable 
flood that, for the past five years, has drowned every bit of respect for the 
German nation in the world. 

This shows only too clearly what a lie it is to say that the loss of the 
war was the cause of the German collapse. No—the military defeat was 
itself but the consequence of a whole series of morbid symptoms and their 
causes that were present in the German nation before the war broke out. 
The war was the catastrophic consequence, visible to all, of an ethical and 
moral poisoning, and of a degeneration of the instinct for self-preservation. 
These were the preliminary causes that, for many years, had been 
undermining the foundations of the nation and the Reich. 


2 Hitler seems to conflate two separate events in Roman history. In 390 BC, in 
the face of the invading Gauls, the Senators placed themselves on the main road 
into the city, hoping to sacrifice themselves and thus to assuage the enemy. 
Later, after the Roman loss to Hannibal at Cannae in 216 BC, the Roman 
citizens turned out to greet and thank the commander Varro because he fought 
nobly for the Republic. 


244 


CHAPTER 10 


10.4 MORAL DISARMAMENT OF A DANGEROUS ACCUSER 


It required the entire bottomless falsehood of the Jews, and their 
fighting comrades the Marxists, to lay blame for the collapse precisely on 
the man who alone had shown a superhuman will and energy in his effort 
to prevent the catastrophe that he had foreseen, and to save the nation from 
that time of humiliation and disgrace. By placing sole blame for the loss of 
the World War on Ludendorff, they took away the weapon of moral right 
from the only adversary dangerous enough to be likely to succeed against 
the betrayers of the Fatherland. 

All this was inspired by the unquestionably true principle that in the 
Big Lie there is always a certain degree of credibility, because the broad 
masses of a nation are always more easily corrupted in the very bottom of 
their hearts than consciously or voluntarily. And in the primitive simplicity 
of their minds, they more readily fall victims to the Big Lie than the small 
lie, since they themselves often tell small lies in little matters, but would 
be ashamed to resort to large-scale falsehoods. It would never occur to them 
to fabricate colossal untruths, and they would not believe that others could 
have the impudence to distort the truth so infamously. 

Even though the facts that prove this are clear, they will still doubt and 
waver, and will continue to think that there must be some other explanation. 
The grossly impudent lie always leaves traces behind it, even after it has 
stuck—a fact that is known to all artful liars in this world, and to all who 
conspire together in the art of lying. These people know only too well how 
to use falsehood for the basest of purposes. 

From time immemorial, however, the Jews have known better than any 
others how to exploit falsehood and calumny. Their very existence is based 
on one great lie, namely, thatthey are a religious community and not a race. 
And what a race. One of the greatest thinkers of mankind has branded them 
for all time with a statement that is profoundly and precisely true: he called 
them “The great master of the lie.”? Those who don’t realize the truth of 


3 Hitler quotes the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer. In his book Parerga and 
Paralipomena (1851), Schopenhauer remarks on the historically low opinion of 
the Jews: “We see also from the two Roman authors [Tacitus and Justinus] how 
much the Jews were at all times, and by all nations, loathed and despised. This 
may be due partly to the fact that they were the only people on earth who did not 
credit man with any existence beyond this life, and were therefore regarded as 
cattle, as the dregs of humanity, but as past masters at telling lies” (1851/2010, 
vol. 2, p. 357). For further discussion see Dalton (201 1b). 


245 


MEIN KAMPF 


that statement, or don’t wish to believe it, will never be able to lend a hand 
in this world to help truth prevail. 

It was a great stroke of fortune for the German nation that its period of 
lingering sickness was so suddenly ended by a terrible catastrophe. If things 
had gone on as they were, the nation would have slowly but surely come 
to ruin. The disease would have become chronic; whereas, in the acute 
form, it at least showed itself clearly to a considerable number of observers. 
It was no accident that man conquered the black plague more easily than 
tuberculosis. The first appeared in terrifying waves of death that shook the 
whole of mankind; the other advances insidiously. The first induces terror; 
the other, gradual indifference. The result is, however, that men opposed 
the first with all their energy, while they try to control tuberculosis by feeble 
means. Thus man has mastered the plague, while tuberculosis masters him. 

The same applies to diseases in national bodies. As long as these 
diseases aren’t of a catastrophic nature, people will slowly accustom 
themselves to them, and eventually succumb. It is then a stroke of luck— 
though a bitter one—when fate decides to intervene in this slow process of 
decay and suddenly brings the victim face to face with the final stage of 
the disease. More often than not, the result of a catastrophe is that a cure is 
undertaken immediately, and carried through with a firm determination. 

But even in such a case, the prerequisite is always the recognition of 
the internal causes that created the disease in question. 


10.5 TOXINS AND SYMPTOMS 


The important question here is the differentiation of the root causes from 
the circumstances growing from them. This becomes all the more difficult 
the longer the toxins remain in the national body, and the longer they are 
allowed to become an integral part of that body. It may easily happen that, 
as time goes on, unquestionably harmful poisons will be accepted as 
belonging to the national being, or that they are tolerated as a necessary evil. 
In this case, it won’t even be seen as necessary to locate the alien virus. 

During the long period of peace prior to the last war, certain evils were 
evident here and there—although, with one or two exceptions, very little 
effort was made against the virus. Here again, these exceptions were first 
and foremost those economic phenomena of the nation that were more 
apparent to the individual consciousness than the harmful conditions 
existing in many other spheres. 


246 


CHAPTER 10 


There were many signs of decay that should have been given serious 
thought. 

As far as economics were concerned, the following may be said: 

The amazing increase of the German population before the war brought 
the question of providing daily bread into a more prominent position in all 
spheres of political and economic thought and action. Unfortunately, those 
responsible couldn’t decide to arrive at the only correct solution, but 
preferred to reach their goal by cheaper methods. Renouncing the idea of 
acquiring fresh territory, and substituting for it a mad desire for global 
economic conquest, was bound to eventually lead to unlimited and harmful 
industrialization. 

The first and most fatal consequence was a weakening of the agricultural 
class, whose decline was proportionate to the increase in the proletariat of 
the urban areas. In the end, the equilibrium was completely upset. 

The big barrier dividing rich and poor now became apparent. Luxury 
and poverty lived so close together that the consequences were bound to 
be deplorable. Poverty and frequent unemployment began to wreak havoc 
with the people, leaving discontent and embitterment behind them. The 
result of this was to divide the population into political classes. Discontent 
increased despite commercial prosperity. Matters finally reached the point 
at which everyone felt that ‘things can’t go on as they are,’ although no one 
seemed able to visualize what was really going to happen. 

These were typical signs of the depths to which the prevailing 
discontent had reached. 


10.6 THE RULE OF MONEY 


Far worse than these, however, were other consequences that became 
apparent as a result of the economization of the nation. 

In proportion to the degree that commerce assumed definite control of 
the state, money became more of a god, to whom all had to serve and bow 
down. Heavenly gods became more and more old-fashioned, and were 
stuffed away in the corners to make room for the worship of Mammon. 
And thus began a period of utter degeneration. This was especially 
pernicious because it came at a time when the nation was at its critical hour, 
and more than ever needed an exalted ideal. Germany should have been 
prepared to protect with the sword her efforts to win her own daily bread 
through ‘peaceful economic labor.’ 


247 


MEIN KAMPF 


Unfortunately, the domination of money was sanctioned in the very 
quarter that should have opposed it. His Majesty the Kaiser made a mistake 
when he raised representatives of the new finance capital to the ranks of 
nobility. Admittedly, it may be an excuse that even Bismarck failed to 
realize the looming danger in this respect. In practice, however, all ideal 
virtues became secondary considerations to those of money; it was clear 
that having once taken this road, the nobility of the sword would soon rank 
second to the nobility of finance. 

Financial operations succeed easier than military ones. Hence it was 
no longer inviting for a true hero or even a statesman to be brought into 
touch with the nearest Jewish banker. Men of real merit weren’t interested 
in cheap decorations, and declined them with thanks. But from the 
standpoint of blood-purity, such a development was deeply regrettable. The 
nobility began to lose more and more of the racial qualities that were a 
condition of its very existence. In many cases, the term ‘ignobility’ would 
have been more appropriate. 


10.7 INTERNATIONALIZATION THROUGH FINANCE 


A serious state of economic decay occurred through the slow 
elimination of the right of private property, and the gradual transference of 
the whole economic structure into the hands of joint stock corporations. 

Labor became, for the first time, degraded into an object of speculation 
at the hands of unscrupulous exploiters. The alientation of property 
ownership increased on a vast scale. The stock exchange began to triumph, 
making slow but sure progress in assuming control of the whole national 
life. 

Before the war, the internationalization of the German economy had 
already begun, by way of stock issues. It’s true that a section of the German 
industrialists made a determined effort to avert the danger. But in the end, 
they gave way before the united attacks of greedy finance-capital, which 
was assisted in this fight by its faithful henchmen in the Marxist movement. 

The persistent war against German ‘heavy industry’ was the visible 
start of the internationalization of German economic life, as envisioned by 
the Marxists. This, however, couldn’t be brought to a successful conclusion 
until Marxism’s victory in the revolution. As I write these words, the 
general attack on the German state railways has succeeded, which are now 


248 


CHAPTER 10 


being handed over to international finance-capital.* Thus ‘international’ 
Social Democracy has once again achieved one of its main objectives. 

The best evidence of how far this ‘economization’ of the German 
nation was able to go can be plainly seen in the fact that when the war was 
over, one of the leading captains of German industry and commerce stated 
that commerce as such was the only force that could put Germany on its 
feet again.* This sort of nonsense was uttered just at the time when France 
was restoring public education on a humanitarian basis, thus doing away 
with the idea that national life is dependent on commerce rather than ideal 
values. The statement broadcast by Stinnes to the world at that time caused 
incredible confusion. It was immediately adopted as a leading slogan by 
all the quacks and big-mouths—the ‘statesmen’ that destiny unleashed on 
Germany after the revolution. 


10.8 GRAVEDIGGERS OF THE MONARCHY 


One of the worst symptoms of decadence in Germany before the war 
was the ever-increasing habit of doing things halfway. This was one of the 
consequences of the general insecurity of the time, and can be attributed 
to a certain cowardice resulting from this and other causes. This disease 
was aggravated by the educational system. 

German education in pre-war times had an extraordinary number of 
weaknesses. It was simply and exclusively limited to the production of pure 
‘knowledge,’ and paid little attention to ‘ability.’ Still less attention was 
given to the development of individual character, insofar as this is ever 
possible. And hardly any attention at all was paid to the development of a 


4 Hitler refers to the Dawes Plan, named after Charles Dawes, vice president 
under Calvin Coolidge. Approved in early 1924, the plan was essentially a 
repayment schedule for the $33 billion debt that was forced on Germany after 
WWI. Germany’s Weimar government accepted the plan in April, which 
involved initial annual payments of 1 billion Marks, rising to 2.5 billion within 
five years. The German railway system was allocated one-third of the total debt, 
which it could not pay, and thus the railway was sold to a private corporation. As 
Hitler says, the railway was literally “handed over” to international finance 
capital. 

5 The industrialist was Hugo Stinnes (1870-1924). Stinnes profited greatly 
during WWI, and also during Germany’s hyperinflation, which had ended just 
prior to the time that Hitler wrote these words. 


249 


MEIN KAMPF 


sense of responsibility, and to strengthening the will and the powers of 
decision. The result was to produce, not strong individuals, but mere 
‘know-it-alls’—as we Germans had come to be known before the war. The 
German was liked because he was useful; but he was little respected, due 
to a weakness of will. It is instructive to note that, among all nationalities, 
the Germans were the first to forgo their citizenship when they moved toa 
foreign country. The lovely saying, ‘With hat in hand, one travels 
throughout the whole land,’ says it all. 

This kind of compliance turned out disastrous when it prescribed the 
exclusive way in which one could approach the monarch. One must never 
contradict him, and everything that he supports must be praised. 

It was here that the frank expression of manly dignity, and not 
subservience, was most needed. Otherwise the monarchy would some day 
perish from all this groveling—and groveling it was, and nothing else! Only 
sycophants and grovelers—in short, all those decadents who are happy 
moving in the higher circles of royalty, rather than honest citizens— 
consider this the proper form of interaction! These exceedingly ‘humble’ 
creatures however, though they grovel before their master and bread-giver, 
invariably show the greatest arrogance towards other mortals. This was 
particularly impudent when they posed as the only people who had the right 
to be called ‘monarchists.’ Only these newly-ennobled or yet-to-be- 
ennobled tapeworms could be capable of such gross impertinence! 

And it has always been just such people who were the gravediggers of 
the monarchy and the monarchical ideal. Nothing else is conceivable. When 
a man is prepared to stand up for a cause, come what may, he never grovels 
before its representative. A man who is serious about the preservation of 
an institution won’t allow himself to be discouraged when the 
representatives of that institution show certain failings. And he certainly 
won’t shout this to the world, as certain false democratic ‘friends’ of the 
monarchy have done. Rather, he will approach His Majesty, the bearer of 
the crown himself, to warn him of the seriousness of a situation, and 
persuade the monarch to act. But the man! am thinking of will deem it his 
duty to protect the monarchy against the monarch himself, no matter what 
personal risk he may run in doing so. 

If the worth of the monarchical institution is dependent on the monarch 
himself, then it would be the worst institution imaginable. Only in rare 
cases are kings found to be models of wisdom and understanding, and 
integrity of character, as some like to claim. But this fact is unacceptable 
to the professional sycophants and grovelers. Yet all upright men—and they 


_ 250 


CHAPTER 10 


are the most valuable of the nation—reject such nonsense. For such men, 
history is history and truth is truth, even where monarchs are concerned. 
No, the good luck to possess a great king who is also a great man is so rare 
that the people may be thankful if an adverse fate has not allotted the worst 
to them. 

It’s clear that the worth and significance of the monarchic ideal cannot 
rest in the person of the monarch alone, unless heaven decrees that the 
crown should rest on the head of a brilliant hero like Frederick the Great, 
or a wise one like Wilhelm I. This happens once in several centuries, but 
hardly more. The ideal of the monarchy takes precedence over the person 
of the monarch, inasmuch as the meaning of the institution must lie in the 
institution itself. Thus the monarch himself is but one whose duty it is to 
serve. He, too, is but a wheel in this machine, and thus is obliged to do his 
duty towards it. He has to adapt himself to the fulfilment of higher goals. 
The ‘monarchist,’ then, is one who does not let the ruler debase the 
institution; rather, he defends it. Otherwise it would be impossible to depose 
an insane ruler, if everything merely centered around the ‘sacred’ person. 


10.9 ‘FIGHTERS FOR THE MONARCHY’ 


It’s vital to insist upon this truth at the present time, because recently 
certain individuals have appeared again, who were largely responsible 
responsible for the collapse of the monarchy. With a certain amount of 
native impudence, these persons once again talk about ‘their king’—which 
is to say, the man whom they shamefully deserted a few years ago, at a 
most critical hour. Those who fail to support this chorus of lies are 
summarily classified as bad Germans. They who make the charge are the 
same class of quitters who ran away in 1918 and began wearing red badges. 
They thought that discretion was the better part of valor. They were 
indifferent about what happened to the Kaiser. They hid themselves as 
peaceful ‘citizens,’ but more often than not they vanished altogether! All 
of a sudden, these champions of royalty were nowhere to be found. 

Cautiously, one by one, these ‘servants and counsellors’ of the crown 
reappeared, to resume their lip-service to royalty—but only after others 
had borne the brunt of the anti-royalist attack and rode out the revolutionary 
storm. And now they are all back again, wistfully remembering the flesh- 
pots of Egypt and almost bursting with devotion for the royal cause. This 
will continue until the day when red badges are again in the ascendant. 


251 


MEIN KAMPF 


Then this whole ramshackle assembly of royal worshippers will scatter 
again, like mice from cats! 

If monarchs weren’t themselves responsible for such things, one could 
almost sympathize with them. But they must realize that, with such 
champions, thrones can be lost but certainly never gained. 

All this servility was a mistake, and was the result of our whole 
educational system, which in this case brought about a particularly severe 
retribution. As a result, these pathetic creatures maintained themselves at all 
the courts and gradually undermined the basis of the monarchy. When it finally 
began to totter, everyone vanished. Naturally; grovellers and lick-spittles are 
never willing to die for their masters. That monarchs never realize this, and 
almost on principle never really learn it, has always been their undoing. 


10.10 COWARDICE IN THE FACE OF RESPONSIBILITY 


One of the worst symptoms of decay was a growing cowardice in the 
face of responsibility, and the resulting weakness in dealing with problems 
of vital importance. 

The starting point of this epidemic, however, was in our parliamentary 
institution, where irresponsibility is particularly cultivated. Unfortunately 
the disease slowly spread to all branches of everyday life, especially the 
sphere of public affairs. Responsibility was being shirked everywhere, and 
this led to insufficient or half-hearted measures being taken. Personal 
responsibility for each act was reduced to a minimum. 

If we consider the attitude of various governments towards a whole 
series of really pernicious phenomena in public life, we will immediately 
recognize the fearful significance of this policy of half-measures and 
cowardice in the face of responsibility. 


10.11 THREE GROUPS OF NEWSPAPER READERS 


I will take only a few examples from the large number of existing cases: 

In journalistic circles, they like to speak of the press as a ‘great power’ 
within the state. As a matter of fact, its importance is immense. One cannot 
easily overestimate it, for the press continues the work of adult education. 

Generally, readers can be divided into three groups: 

First, those who believe everything they read; 


252 


CHAPTER 10 


Second, those who no longer believe anything; 

Third, those who critically examine what they read and form their 
judgments accordingly. 

Numerically, the first group is by far the largest. It consists of the broad 
masses of the people, and therefore, intellectually, it forms the simplest part 
of the nation. 

It cannot be classified according to occupation but only by grades of 
intelligence. Under this category fall all those who haven’t been born to 
think for themselves or who haven’t learned to do so, and who—partly 
through incompetence and partly through ignorance—believe everything 
they read. This group includes that type of lazy individual who, although 
capable of thinking for himself, absorbs what others have thought, 
assuming that they must have put some effort into it. 

The influence of the press on all these people is therefore enormous; 
they are, after all, the broad masses of a nation. They aren’t willing or able 
to personally sift through what is being served up to them, and so their 
whole attitude towards daily problems is almost solely the result of outside 
influence. All this can be advantageous where public enlightenment is 
provided by serious lovers of the truth, but is catastrophic when done at 
the hand of scoundrels and liars. 

The second group is numerically smaller, being partly composed of those 
who were formerly in the first group, but after a series of bitter 
disappointments are now prepared to believe nothing of what they read. They 
hate all newspapers. Either they don’t read them at all or they become very 
annoyed at their contents, which they hold to be nothing but lies and 
falsehoods. These people are difficult to handle; they will always be skeptical 
of the truth. Consequently, they are useless for any form of positive work. 

The third group is easily the smallest. It’s composed of real 
intellectuals, who have the natural aptitude and education to think for 
themselves. In all things, they try to form their own judgments, while at 
the same time carefully sifting through what they read. They won’t read 
any newspaper without using their own intelligence to challenge the writer, 
and naturally this makes things difficult. Journalists ‘appreciate’ this type 
of reader only with a large degree of caution. 

For members of this third group, the nonsense served up by the 
newspapers isn’t very dangerous or even very important. In the majority of 
cases, these readers have learned to regard every journalist as fundamentally 
a rogue who only rarely speaks the truth. Unfortunately, the value of these 
readers lies in their intelligence and not in their numbers—a misfortune, in 


253 


MEIN KAMPF 


a period where wisdom counts for nothing and majorities for everything! 
Nowadays, when the ballots of the masses are the deciding factor, the 
decision lies in the hands of the numerically strongest group—which is to 
say, the first group: the crowd of simpletons and the credulous. 


10.12 STATE AND PRESS 


It is an overriding interest of the state and nation to prevent these people 
from falling into the hands of bad, ignorant, or even. vicious-minded 
teachers. Therefore it is the duty of the state to supervise their education 
and prevent every form of mischief. Particular attention should be paid to 
the press. Its influence on these people is by far the strongest and most 
penetrating of all, because its effect is not transitory but continual. Its 
immense significance lies in the uniform and persistent repetition of its 
teaching. Here, if anywhere, the state should never forget that all means 
should serve the same end. It must not be led astray by the drivel of so- 
called ‘freedom of the press,’ or be talked into neglecting its duty, and 
withholding from the nation that which is good and which does good. With 
ruthless determination, the state must keep control of this instrument of 
popular education and place it at the service of the state and the nation. 

But what dish did that German press serve up to its readers, in pre-war 
days? Was it not the worst poison imaginable? Wasn’t the worst form of 
pacifism injected into our people at a time when others were preparing, 
slowly but surely, to pounce upon Germany? Even in peacetime, didn’t this 
self-same press of ours already instill into the public mind a doubt as to 
the sovereign rights of the state itself, thereby limiting its means of defense? 
Wasn’t it the German press that understood how to make all this nonsense 
about ‘western democracy’ palatable to our people, until an enthusiastic” 
public was eventually prepared to entrust its future to the League of 
Nations? Wasn’t this press responsible for promoting moral decay? Weren’t 
morals and public decency made to look ridiculous and old-fashioned, until 
our people finally became ‘modern’? By means of persistent attacks, didn’t 
the press continue to undermine the authority of the state, until a single 
blow sufficed to bring this institution down? Didn’t the press oppose with 
all its might every movement to give the state that which belongs to the 
state? Didn’t it continually criticize the military, thus injuring its reputation, 
sabotage the draft, demand refusal of military credits, etc., until the result 
was inevitable? 


254 


CHAPTER 10 


10.13 JEWISH PRESS TACTICS 


The function of the so-called liberal press was to dig a grave for the 
German people and the German Reich. We need not mention the lying 
papers of the Marxist press; for them, lying is as much a vital necessity as 
the mouse is to a cat. Their sole task is to break the national backbone of 
the people, thus preparing the nation to become the slaves of international 
capital and its masters, the Jews. 

And what did the state do to counteract this mass poisoning of the 
nation? Nothing, absolutely nothing at all! A few silly decrees, a few fines 
for criminality, and that was it. By this policy, they hoped to win the favor 
of this plague by means of flattery, with a recognition of the ‘value’ of the 
press, its ‘importance,’ its ‘educational mission,’ and similar nonsense. The 
Jews acknowledged all this with a knowing smile and a sly thanks. 

The reason for this disgraceful failure on the part of the state lay not 
so much in its refusal to realize the danger, as in the cowardly way of 
meeting the situation through half-hearted decisions and measures. No one 
one had the courage to employ any thoroughly radical methods. Everyone 
piddled around with halfway prescriptions. Thus, instead of striking at its 
heart, they only irritated the viper. The result was that not only did 
everything remain the same, but the power of the institutions that should 
have been combated grew stronger year by year. 

The government’s defense in those days, against a mainly Jewish- 
controlled press that was slowly corrupting the nation, followed no definite 
line of action; it was lacking in resolve and, above all, had no fixed goal in 
view. This is where official understanding of the situation completely failed: 
in estimating the importance of the struggle, in choosing the means, and in 
deciding on a definite plan. They merely tinkered with the problem. 
Occasionally, when bitten, they imprisoned a journalistic viper for a few weeks 
or months, but the whole snakes’ nest was allowed to carry on unmolested. 


10.14 THE ‘RESPECTABLE’ PRESS 


It must be admitted that all this was the result of, on the one hand, 
extraordinarily crafty tactics on the part of Jewry, and on the other, an 
obviously official stupidity or naiveté. The Jew was too clever to allow a 
simultaneous attack on the whole of his press. No: one section served as 
cover for the other. 


255 


MEIN KAMPF 


In the most despicable manner possible, the Marxist newspapers 
reviled everything that was sacred, furiously attacking the state and 
government and inciting certain classes of the community against each 
other. At the same time, the Jewish bourgeois-democratic papers knew how 
to camouflage themselves as models of objectivity. They studiously 
avoided harsh language, knowing well that blockheads can only judge 
external appearances and never penetrate to the real depth and meaning of 
anything. They measure the worth of something by its exterior and not its 
content. The press owes its esteem to this human frailty. 

For these people, the Frankfurter Zeitung was the essence of 
respectability. It always carefully avoided coarse language. It rejected the 
use of every form of physical force, and persistently appealed to the nobility 
of fighting with ‘intellectual’ weapons—an idea that was, curiously enough, 
most popular with the least intellectual classes. This is one of the results of 
our half-education, which turns people away from the instinct of nature, 
and pumps them with a certain amount of knowledge without being able 
to create a complete understanding. To this end, diligence and good will 
are useless; it requires a necessary, inborn intelligence. 

Man must never fall into the insanity of thinking that he was meant to 
become lord and master of nature, which a half-education has helped to 
encourage. Man must realize the fundamental necessity of nature’s rule, and 
realize that his existence is subject to the law of eternal strift and upward 
struggle. He will then feel that there cannot be a separate law for mankind in a 
universe in which planets orbit suns, moons orbit planets, and where the strong 
are always the masters of the weak—subjecting them to such laws, or crushing 
them. Man must submit to the eternal principles of this supreme wisdom. He 
may try to understand them, but he can never free himself from their sway. 

It’s for just such intellectual hedonists that the Jew writes his so-called 
intellectual press. The Frankfurter Zeitung and Berliner Tageblatt are 
written for them; the tone is adapted to them, and it is on them that such 
papers have an influence. While studiously avoiding all crude forms of 
expression, poison is injected from other vials into the hearts of the readers. 
The effervescent tone and the fine phraseology lull the readers into 
believing that a love for knowledge and moral principle is the sole driving 
force of such papers—whereas in reality these features represent a cunning 
way of disarming any opposition that might be directed against the press. 

They make such a parade of respectability that the soft-headed readers 
are all the more ready to believe that the papers’ excesses are only of a mild 
nature, and insufficient to warrant legal action being taken against them. Such 


256 


CHAPTER 10 


action, they say, would lead to a violation of press freedom—a euphemism 
for lying to and poisoning the people. Hence the authorities are very slow to 
take any steps against these bandits for fear of immediately alienating the 
‘respectable’ press—a fear that’s all too well grounded. The moment any 
attempt is made to proceed against a member of the gutter press, all the others 
rush to its assistance—not to support its policy, God forbid, but simply and 
solely to defend the principle of freedom of the press and of public opinion. 
This outcry will succeed in cowering even the staunchest critic, because it 
comes from the mouths of the ‘respectable’ papers. 

And so this poison was allowed to enter the national bloodstream and 
infect public life without the government taking any action to control the 
disease. The ridiculous half-measures that were taken were, in themselves, 
are proof of a decay that was already threatening to break-up the Reich. 
An institution practically surrenders its existence when it no longer has the 
resolve to defend itself with all available weapons. Every half-measure is 
the outward expression of an inner process of decay, one that must 
eventually lead to an external collapse. 

I believe that our present generation could easily master this danger, if 
they were rightly led. It has gone through certain experiences that surely 
strengthened the nerves of all those who didn’t lose them completely. In 
days to come, the Jew will surely raise a tremendous cry in his newspapers, 
if a hand is laid on his favorite nest, if a move is made to end this press 
mischief, and if this tool of education is brought under state control and no 
longer left in the hands of aliens and enemies of the people. I believe that 
this will be easier for us than it was for our fathers. A 30-cm shell hisses 
louder than a thousand Jewish newspaper vipers—so let them hiss! 


10.15 SYPHILIS 


A further example of the weak and half-hearted way in which vital 
national problems were dealt with in pre-war Germany is the following: 
Parallel to the political, ethical, and moral infection of the nation has been, 
for many years, an equally virulent process of poisoning the public health. 
Particularly in large cities, syphilis has steadily increased, and tuberculosis 
has steadily reaped its harvest of death in almost every part of the country. 

Although in both cases the effect on the nation was alarming, it seemed 
as if no one was able to undertake any decisive measures against these 
scourges. 


257 


MEIN KAMPF 


In the case of syphilis especially, the attitude of state and governmental 
leaders was one of absolute capitulation. To combat it, something far more 
sweeping was required. The discovery of a questionable remedy, and its 
commercial exploitation, were only of little assistance in fighting this plague. 
Here again, the only correct course is to attack the disease in its causes rather 
than its symptoms. The cause lies mainly in the prostitution of love. Even if 
it didn’t directly bring about this frightful plague, it would still be deeply 
harmful to the people; the moral havoc resulting from this degeneracy would 
be sufficient to bring about the destruction of the nation, slowly but surely. 

This Judaizing of our spiritual life and mammonizing of our mating 
instinct will sooner or later ruin our future offspring. The vigorous children 
of a natural, emotional bond will be replaced by miserable specimens of 
financial expediency. Economic considerations are more and more 
becoming the basis and sole prerequisite for marriage. And love must then 
find its outlet somewhere else. 

Here, as elsewhere, one may defy Nature for a certain period of time; 
but sooner or later she will take her revenge. And when we realize this 
truth, it’s often too late. 

Our own nobility offers an example of the devastating consequences 
that follow from a persistent refusal to recognize the natural requirements 
for marriage. Here we have before us the results of those reproductive 
habits that, on the one hand, are determined by social pressure and, on the 
other, by financial considerations. The one leads to inherited weaknesses, 
and the other to poisoning of the blood. Just consider how every department 
store Jewess is viewed as an eligible mate for our royalty—and indeed, it 
shows. All this leads to absolute degeneration. 

Today our bourgeoisie strive to follow the same path; they will come 
to the same end. 

These unpleasant truths are hastily and nonchalantly brushed aside, as 
if by so doing the truth could be abolished. No: it can’t be denied that our 
urban populations are tending more and more toward a prostituted love- 
life, and are thus becoming more and more contaminated by the scourge 
of syphilis. It simply is true. The most visible effects of this mass 
contamination can be seen, on the one hand, in our insane asylums and, on 
the other, unfortunately, in our children. They are the sad product of this 
steadily growing contamination of our sexual life; in their sicknesses, the 
children reveal the vices of their parents. 

There are many ways of reconciling oneself to this unpleasant and 
terrible fact. Many people go about seeing nothing at all or, more precisely, 


258 


CHAPTER 10 


not wanting to see anything. This is by far the simplest and easiest 
‘opinion.’ Others cover themselves in the sacred mantle of prudery, as 
absurd as it is hypocritical. They describe the whole situation as sinful, and 
are profoundly indignant when brought face to face with a victim. They 
close their eyes in pious horror to this godless scourge, and pray to God 
that he might rain down fire and brimstone on this whole Sodom and 
Gomorrah—if possible, after their deaths. In doing so, God should once 
again make an instructive example of this shameless humanity. A third 
group, finally, are well aware of the terrible results that this scourge 
inevitably brings about, but they merely shrug their shoulders, fully 
convinced that nothing can be done against this danger. Hence the only 
thing to do is let matters take their own course. 


10.16 THESIN AGAINST BLOOD AND RACE 


Undoubtedly all this is very convenient and simple, but it must not be 
forgotten that a nation can fall victim to such convenience. The excuse that 
other nations are also faring poorly doesn’t change the fact of our own 
deterioration, except that feelings of sympathy for others makes our own 
suffering easier to bear. 

But the important question, then, is this: Which nation will be the first 
to take the initiative in mastering this plague, and which nations will 
succumb to it? This is the crux of the whole situation. Here again we see 
the touchstone of racial value: the race that cannot withstand the test will 
simply die out, making room for healthier, tougher, or more resistant races. 
Because this question primarily concerns future generations, it is one of 
those cases where, with terrible justification, the sins of the fathers are 
visited upon their children, unto the tenth generation—a truism, but one 
that applies only to a desecration of blood and race. 

The sin against blood and race is the original sin in this world. It brings 
an end to every nation that commits it. 

The attitude towards this one vital problem in pre-war Germany was 
most regrettable. What measures were taken to halt the infection of our 
youth in the large cities? What was done to put an end to the contamination 
and mammonization of our love lives? What was done to fight the resultant 
syphilization of our national body? 

The answer to this question can best be illustrated by showing what 
should have been done. 


259 


MEIN KAMPF 


Instead of taking this problem lightly, the authorities should have 
realized that the fortunes or misfortunes of future generations depended on 
its solution. Yes—it would be decisive for the entire future of our people. 
But to admit this would have required ruthless measures and surgical 
operations. What was needed, first of all, was that the attention of entire 
country be concentrated on this terrible danger, so that everyone would 
realize the importance of fighting against it. It would be futile to impose 
definitive and often unbearable obligations, and to expect them to be 
effective, unless the public were thoroughly instructed on the need for such 
obligations. But this demands a widespread and systematic method of 
enlightenment, one that excludes any other daily problems that might 
distract the public’s attention. 

In every case where apparently impossible demands are involved, the 
entire public attention must be focused on this one question, as though its 
solution were a matter of life or death. Only in this way can the public be 
compelled to join in a great voluntary effort, and to achieve important results. 

This principle applies also to the individual man, provided he wants to 
achieve some great end. He must always concentrate his efforts on one 
definitely limited stage of his progress, which has to be completed before 
the next step is attempted. Those who don’t attempt to realize their aims 
step by step, and who don’t concentrate their energy in reaching the 
individual stages, will never attain the final objective. At some point along 
the road, they will falter and fail. This systematic way of approaching an 
objective is an art in itself, and always calls for expending every ounce of 
energy in order to conquer the road, step by step. 

Therefore the most essential prerequisite for an attack on such a 
difficult stage of the pathway of humanity is that the authorities must 
succeed in convincing the masses that the immediate objective that is now 
being sought is the only one that deserves to be considered, and the only 
one on which everything depends. The broad masses are never able to 
clearly see the whole stretch of road ahead without becoming tired and thus 
losing faith in their ability to complete the task. A certain number will keep 
the objective in mind, but they are only able to survey the road in small 
stages, as in the case of the traveller who knows where his journey will end 
but who tackles the endless stretch far better by attacking it in degrees. This 
is the only way can he advance without losing enthusiasm. 


260 


CHAPTER 10 


10.17 THE TASK OF COMBATING SYPHILIS 


In this way, with the assistance of every form of propaganda, the 
problem of fighting syphilis should have been placed before the public— 
not as a task, but as the main task. Every possible means should have been 
employed to bring this truth to the minds of the people, until the whole 
nation has been convinced that everything depends on the solution to this 
problem; which is to say, a healthy future or national decay. 

Only after such preparatory measures—spread over a period of many 
years, if necessary—will the public be fully aroused, and only then can 
serious and definite measures be taken. We could then do so without the 
risk of being misunderstood, or of being suddenly faced with a slackening 
of the public will. 

It must be made clear to all that a serious fight against this plague calls 
for tremendous sacrifices and an enormous amount of work. 

A war against syphilis means fighting against prostitution, against 
prejudice, against old-established customs, against current fashion, public 
opinion, and last but not least, against a false prudery in certain circles. 

The first prerequisite to be fulfilled before the state can claim a moral 
right to fight against all these things is the facilitation of earlier marriages 
for the coming generations. Whatever way we view it, late marriages have 
the sanction of a custom that is, and will remain, a disgrace to humanity. 
It’s a cursed institution, ill-suited to a being who likes to regard himself as 
in the ‘image’ of God. 

Prostitution is a disgrace to humanity, and cannot be removed simply 
by moralistic lectures, good intentions, etc. Its restriction and final 
elimination presupposes the removal of a whole series of contributory 
circumstances. The first remedy must always be to establish such 
conditions as will make early marriages possible, especially for young 
men—women are, after all, only passive subjects in this matter. 

An illustration of the extent to which people have so often been led 
astray nowadays is shown by the fact that one often hears mothers in so- 
called ‘good’ society openly expressing their satisfaction at having found 
their daughter a man who has ‘sown his wild oats,’ etc. As there is no 
shortage of such men, the poor girl will be happy with one of these de- 
horned Siegfrieds, and the children will be a visible result of such 
supposedly sensible unions. 

When one realizes that, apart from this, every possible effort is being 
made to hinder the process of procreation and that Nature is being wilfully 


261 


MEIN KAMPF 


cheated of her rights, there remains really only one question: Why does 
such an institution still exist, and what purpose does it serve? Isn’t it little 
better than prostitution? Doesn’t our duty to posterity play a part any more? 
Or don’t people realize the curse they are inflicting on themselves and their 
offspring by such criminally foolish neglect of one of the primary laws of 
nature? 

This is how civilized nations degenerate and gradually perish. 

Marriage is not an end in itself, but must serve a higher goal, which is 
to increase and maintain the species and race. This is its only meaning and 
purpose. 

This being the case, it’s clear that the institution of marriage must be 
judged by the manner in which it fulfills its function. Therefore early 
marriages should be the rule, because only the young couple will still have 
the strength necessary for raising healthy offspring. Of course, early 
marriages cannot be made the rule without a whole series of social changes; 
otherwise a policy of early marriages cannot even be contemplated. In other 
words, a solution of this seemingly small question cannot occur without 
decisive social measures. Their importance should be clear, especially when 
the so-called ‘social’ Republic has shown itself unable to solve the housing 
problem, and thus has made it impossible for innumerable couples to get 
married. That only furthers the advance of prostitution. 

Another reason why early marriages are impossible is our absurd 
method of regulating the scale of salaries, which pays far too little attention 
to the problem of family support. 

Prostitution, therefore, can only be seriously tackled if, by means of a 
radical social reform, early marriage is made easier than at present. This is 
the first preliminary requirement for the solution of this problem. 


10.18 SOUND MIND ONLY IN SOUND BODY 


Secondly, a whole series of evils must be eradicated through education 
and training—things that no one has yet worried about. First of all, our 
present educational system must establish a balance between mental 
instruction and physical training. The institution known today as 
Gymnasium is a positive insult to the Greek model. Our system of 
education entirely loses sight of the fact that, in the long run, a healthy 
mind can exist only in a healthy body. This statement, with few exceptions, 
applies particularly to the broad masses of the nation. 


262 


CHAPTER 10 


In pre-war Germany, there was a time when no one took the trouble to 
think over this truth. Training of the body was criminally neglected, and 
the one-sided training of ‘the mind’ was regarded as a sufficient guarantee 
for the nation’s greatness. This mistake showed its effects sooner than 
anticipated. It’s no accident that Bolshevik teaching flourishes in those 
regions whose population has been degenerated by hunger: in central 
Germany, Saxony, and the Ruhr Valley. In all these districts there is a 
marked absence of any serious resistance, even by the so-called intellectual 
classes, against this Jewish disease. And the simple reason is that the 
intellectual classes are themselves physically degenerate—not through 
privation, but through education. The exclusive intellectualism of education 
among our upper classes makes them incapable of defending themselves, 
let alone making their way in life. In nearly every case, physical weakness 
is the forerunner of personal cowardice. 

The extreme emphasis on purely intellectual education, and the 
consequent neglect of physical training, necessarily leads to sexual thoughts 
in early youth. Those youth whose constitutions have been trained and 
hardened by sports and gymnastics are less prone to sexual indulgence than 
those stay-at-homes who have been fed exclusively with intellectual fare. 
A sensible system of education must bear this in mind. We must not forget 
that a healthy young man will have different expectations from a woman 
than those of a weakling who has been prematurely corrupted. 

Thus, in every branch of our education, the daily curriculum must 
occupy a boy’s free time in useful development of his physical powers. He 
has no right in those years to loaf about, becoming a nuisance in public 
streets and cinemas. But when his day’s work is done, he should harden 
his young body so that he will not become soft later in life. To prepare for 
this, and to carry it out, should be the function of our educational system, 
and not exclusively to pump in so-called wisdom. Our school system must 
also rid itself of the notion that bodily training is best left to the individual 
himself. There is no such thing as freedom to sin against posterity, and thus 
against the race. 


10.19 THE FIGHT AGAINST SPIRITUAL POISONING 


The fight against the poisoning of the mind must be waged 
simultaneously with the training of the body. Our whole public life today 
may be compared to a hothouse for sexual ideas and incitements. A glance 


263 


MEIN KAMPF 


at the bill-of-fare provided by our cinemas, playhouses, and theaters 
suffices to prove that this is not the right food, especially for our youth. In 
shop windows and advertisements, the most vulgar means are used to 
attract public attention. Anyone who hasn’t completely lost contact with 
adolescent yearnings will realize that all this must cause great damage. This 
seductive and sensual atmosphere puts ideas into the heads of our youth 
that, at their age, should still be unknown to them. 

Unfortunately, the results of this kind of education can best be seen in 
our contemporary youth. They mature too early and are therefore old before 
their time. The law courts occasionally throw a distressing light on the 
spiritual life of our 14- and 15-year-olds. Who, then, will be surprised to learn 
that syphilis claims its victims already at this age? And isn’t it deplorable to 
see the number of physically weak and intellectually spoiled young men, 
who have been introduced to the rites of marriage by the big-city whores? 

No; those who wish to seriously combat prostitution must first assist 
in removing its spiritual basis. They will have to ruthlessly clean up the 
moral plague of our city ‘culture,’ and do so without regard for the outcry 
that will follow. If we don’t lift our youth out of the morass of their present 
environment, they will drown in it. Those who refuse to see these things 
are deliberately encouraging them, and thus are guilty of spreading the 
effects of prostitution to the future—since the future belongs to the coming 
generation. This process of cleansing our culture must be applied in 
practically all spheres. Theater, art, literature, the cinema, the press, and 
advertisements, all must remove the stains of our rotting world and be 
placed in the service ofa moral, political, and cultural idea. Public life must 
be freed from the asphyxiating perfume of our modern eroticism, as well 
as from all unmanly and prudish hypocrisy. In all these things, the aim and 
the method must be determined by thoughtful consideration for the 
preservation of our national well-being in body and soul. The right to 
personal freedom falls behind the duty of maintaining the race. 

Only after such measures have been put into practice can a medical 
campaign against this plague begin with some hope of success. Buthere again, 
half-measures are worthless. Far-reaching and important decisions must be 
made. It’s a half-measure if incurables are given the opportunity of infecting 
one healthy person after another. This would be that kind of humanitarianism 
that allows a hundred to perish in order to avoid hurting one individual. 

The demand that defective people be prevented from producing 
defective offspring is one that’s based on the most reasonable grounds, and 
its proper fulfillment is the most humane act of mankind. Unhappy and 


264 


CHAPTER 10 


undeserved suffering of millions will be spared, with the result that there 
will be a gradual improvement in national health. A determination to act in 
this way will at the same time provide an obstacle against the further spread 
of venereal disease. It would then be a case, where necessary, of mercilessly 
isolating all incurables—a barbaric measure for those unfortunates, but a 
blessing for the present generation and for posterity. The temporary pain 
experienced in this century can and will spare millennia from suffering. 

The fight against syphilis, and the prostitution that paves its way, is 
one of the gigantic tasks of humanity. It’s not merely a case of solving a 
single problem but the removal of a whole series of evils that are the 
contributory causes of this plague. Disease of the body in this case is merely 
the result of a sickening of the moral, social, and racial instincts. 

But if, for reasons of laziness or cowardice, this battle isn’t fought to 
the finish, we can imagine what conditions will be like in 500 years. Little 
of God’s image will be left in human nature, except to mock the Creator. 


10.20 THE ‘PROTECTION CLAUSE’ 


But what was done in old Germany to counteract this plague? If we 
think calmly about it, the answer is distressing. It’s true that in 
governmental circles, the terrible and injurious effects of this disease were 
well known, even though they didn’t consider the consequences. But the 
counter-measures that were officially adopted were ineffective and a 
hopeless failure. They tinkered with cures for the symptoms, and 
completely neglected the cause of the disease. Prostitutes were medically 
examined and controlled as far as possible, and when signs of infection 
were apparent, they were sent to a hospital. But when outwardly cured, 
they were once more let loose on humanity. 

It’s true that a ‘protective clause’ was introduced that made sexual 
intercourse a punishable offence for all those not completely cured, or those 
suffering from a disease. This legislation was correct in theory, but in 
practice it failed completely. In the first place, in the majority of cases, 
women will decline to appear in court as witnesses against men who have 
robbed them of their health. She, especially, has little to gain from it. In 
most cases, she will be the one to suffer the most; women would be far 
more exposed than men to uncharitable remarks. And one can only imagine 
what the situation would be if a woman was infected by her own husband! 
Should she lay charges against him? Or what should she do? 


265 


MEIN KAMPF 


In the case of the man, there is the additional fact that he frequently is 
unfortunate enough to run up against this plague when he is under the 
influence of alcohol. His condition makes it impossible for him to assess 
the qualities of his ‘beauty’—a fact that’s well known to every diseased 
prostitute, and makes them single out men in this ideal condition for 
preference. The result is that the unfortunate man isn’t able to later recall 
who his compassionate benefactress was, which isn’t surprising in cities 
like Berlin and Munich. Many such cases are visitors from the provinces, 
who are held speechless and enthralled by the magic charm of city life. 

In the final analysis, who is able to say whether he has been infected 
or not? Are there not innumerable cases on record where an apparently 
cured person has a relapse and does untold harm without knowing it? 

Therefore, in practice, the results of these legislative measures are 
almost nothing. The same applies to the control of prostitution; and finally, 
even the medical treatment and cure are nowadays unsafe and doubtful. 
Only one thing is certain. The plague has spread further and further despite 
all measures, and this alone suffices to prove their ineffectiveness. 

Everything else that was done was as inefficient as it was absurd. The 
spiritual prostitution of the people wasn’t prevented; or rather, virtually 
nothing was done at all. 

Those who don’t regard this subject as a serious one would do well to 
examine the statistical data of the spread of this disease, study its growth 
in the last century, and then contemplate its further development. The 
ordinary observer, unless he were particularly stupid, would experience a 
cold shudder running down his back! 

The half-hearted and wavering attitude adopted in old Germany 
towards this terrible phenomenon can assuredly be taken as a visible sign 
of national decay. When the courage to fight for one’s own health is no 
longer in evidence, then the right to live in this world of struggle also 
ceases. This world belongs only to the forceful ‘wholes,’ and not to the 
weak ‘halves.’ 


10.21 THE BOLSHEVIZATION OF ART 


One of the most visible signs of decay in the old Reich was the slow 
decline of the cultural level. But by ‘culture’ I don’t mean that which is 
nowadays designated as ‘civilization,’ which, on the contrary, may rather 
be regarded as inimical to a truly elevated standard of thinking and living. 


266 


CHAPTER 10 


At the turn of the last century, a new artistic element began to make its 
appearance in our world. It was something that had been previously 
unknown and foreign to us. In former times, there were certainly offences 
against good taste; but these were mostly departures from the orthodox 
canons of art, and posterity could recognize a certain historical value in 
them. But the new products showed signs, not only of artistic aberration 
but of a destructive spiritual degeneration. Here, in the cultural sphere, the 
signs of the coming political collapse first became apparent. 

The Bolshevization of art is the only cultural life-form, and the only 
spiritual manifestation, that Bolshevism is capable of. 

Anyone to whom this statement may appear strange need only take a 
glance at those lucky Bolshevized states and, to his horror, he will there 
recognize those morbid monstrosities that have been produced by insane 
and degenerate men. All those artistic aberrations that are classified under 
the names of cubism and Dadaism,® since the turn of the century, are 
manifestations of art that have come to be officially recognized by the state 
itself. This phenomenon made its appearance even during the short-lived 
period of the Soviet Republic in Bavaria. Even here it was clear that all the 
official posters, propagandist drawings in newspapers, etc., showed signs 
not only of political but also of cultural decay. 

About 60 years ago, a political collapse such as we are experiencing 
today would have been just as inconceivable as the cultural decline that 
was manifested in futurist and cubist works since 1900. Sixty years ago, 
an exhibition of so-called Dadaistic ‘experiences’ would have been an 
absolutely preposterous idea. The organizers of such an exhibition would 
then have been tossed into a madhouse, whereas today they are 
appointed presidents of art societies. At that time, such a plague would 
never have been allowed to spread. Public opinion wouldn’t have 
tolerated it, and the government wouldn’t have remained silent; for it is 
the duty of a government to save its people from being stampeded into 
such intellectual madness. But this would have been the inevitable result 
of this kind of art. It would have marked one of the worst changes in 
human history; for it would have meant that a retrogressive process had 
begun to take place in the human brain—of which the final stages would 
be unthinkable. 

6 Dada and cubism were iconoclastic and anti-classical schools of art that 
appeared in the early 20th century. Dadaism in particularly was heavily 


influenced by Jewish artists; see Sanderson (2011). Among the more prominent 
of these was Marc Chagall. 


267 


MEIN KAMPF 


If we study the course of our cultural life during the last 25 years, we 
will be astonished to note how far we have already gone in this process of 
regression. Everywhere we find the presence of those germs that give rise 
to tumorous growths that must sooner or later bring about the ruin of our 
culture. Here we find undoubted symptoms of a slowly decaying world. 
And woe to the nations that are no longer able to master this disease! 

Such diseases could be seen in almost every field of German art and 
culture. Here everything seems to have passed the peak of its excellence and 
now is rushing toward the abyss. At the beginning of the century, the theater 
seemed already degenerating and ceasing to be a cultural factor—except the 
Court theaters, which opposed this prostitution of the national art. Apart from 
these exceptions, and also a few other decent institutions, the plays produced 
on the stage were of such a nature that the people would have benefited by 
not visiting them at all. It was a sad symptom of decline that the youth could 
no longer visit most of these so-called ‘art centers’-—a fact that was 
shamelessly admitted by the frequently-seen warming: “Youth Not Admitted!” 


10.22 VILIFICATION OF A GREAT PAST 


Bear in mind that these precautions had to be taken in regard to 
institutions whose main purpose should have been to promote the education 
of the youth, and not merely to provide entertainment for sophisticated 
adults. What would the great dramatists of other times have said of such 
measures, and above all, of the conditions that made these measures 
necessary? How Schiller would have been enflamed, and how Goethe 
would have turned away in disgust! 

But what are Schiller, Goethe, or Shakespeare when compared with 
the heroes of our modern German literature! Old, wom-out, and 
outmoded—nay, obsolete. For it was typical of this epoch that not only 
were its own products bad, but in the process it reviled everything that was 
truly great in the past. This phenomenon is very characteristic of such 
epochs. The more vile and miserable are the men and products, the more 
they will hate and denigrate the ideal achievements of former generations. 
What these people would like best is to completely destroy every vestige 
of the past, so that, by excluding the standard of comparison, their own 
kitsch could be looked upon as ‘art.’ 

Hence every new institution, however wretched and miserable it is, will 
try all the harder to erase the traces of the past. But any real innovation that’s 


268 


CHAPTER 10 


for the benefit of humanity can always face comparison with the best of the 
past; and frequently it happens that those accomplishments of past generations 
guarantee the acceptance of modern productions. There is no fear that modern 
works of real value will look pale and worthless beside the monuments of the 
past. That which is contributed to the general store of human culture often 
fulfills a necessary role, in order to keep the memory of old achievements 
alive, because this memory alone is the standard whereby our own works are 
properly appreciated. Only those who have nothing of value to give to the 
world, but would rather give it God-knows-what, will hate everything that 
already exists, and would like to negate or destroy it completely. 

And this truth holds good not only for new cultural phenomena but 
also in politics. The more inferior new revolutionary movements are, the 
more they will try to denigrate the old forms. Here again the desire to pawn 
off their kitsch as great and original achievements leads them into a blind 
hatred of the superior work of the past. As long as the historical memory 
of Frederick the Great, for instance, still lives, Frederick Ebert can arouse 
nothing but limited amazement. The relation of the hero of Sans Souci to 
the former bartender of Bremen may be compared to that of the sun to the 
moon; for the moon can shine only after the sun has cast off its rays. Thus 
we can readily understand why all the new moons in human history have 
hated the permanent stars. 

In politics, if fate should happen to temporarily place the power to rule 
in the hands of those non-entities, they are eager not only to defile and 
besmirch the past, but at the same time will use all means to evade criticism 
of their own acts. The law for the protection of the Republic, which the 
new German state enacted, may be taken as one example of this. 

One has good grounds to be suspicious of any new idea, any doctrine, 
any new worldview, or any political or economical movement, that tries to 
deny everything that the past has produced, or to present it as inferior and 
worthless. In general, the reason for such hatred is either its own inferiority 
or an evil intention. Any renovation that’s truly beneficial to human 
progress will always have to begin its constructive work where the last 
stones have been laid. It need not be ashamed of using those pre-existing 
truths. All of human culture, as well as man himself, is only the result of 
one long line of development, where each generation has contributed but 
one stone to the building of the whole structure. The meaning and purpose 
of revolutions cannot be to tear down the whole building, but to take away 
that which is bad or unsuitable, and to continue building on the space that 
has been laid bare. 


269 


MEIN KAMPF 


Thus alone is it possible to talk of human progress. Otherwise the world 
would never be free of chaos, since each generation would feel entitled to 
reject the past and to destroy all its works, as the necessary prerequisite to 
any new work of its own. 


10.23 SPIRITUAL PREPARATION FOR BOLSHEVISM 


The saddest feature of our whole pre-war culture was not only that it 
was barren of any cultural or artistic creative force, but the hatred with 
which the memory of the greater past was besmirched and effaced. Around 
the end of the last century, people were less interested in producing new 
significant works of their own—particularly in the fields of dramatic art 
and literature—than in defaming the best works of the past, and in 
presenting them as inferior and outdated: as if this period of disgraceful 
decadence had the capacity to produce anything of superior quality. 

Efforts to conceal the past from the eyes of the present afforded clear 
evidence of the fact that these apostles of the future acted from an evil 
intent. These signs should have made it clear to all that it wasn’t a question 
of new, though wrong, cultural ideas, but of a process of destroying all 
culture. It threw the healthy artistic feeling into utter confusion, thus 
spiritually preparing the way for political Bolshevism. If the creative spirit 
of the Periclean age is manifested in the Parthenon, then the Bolshevist era 
is manifested through a cubist monstrosity. 

In this connection, attention must be drawn once again to the lack of 
courage displayed by one section of our people, namely, by those who, in 
virtue of their education and position, should have been obligated to resist 
this cultural disgrace. But they failed to offer serious resistance, and 
surrendered to what they considered the inevitable. This abdication was 
due to a fear of the ruckus that would be raised by the apostles of Bolshevist 
art, who viciously attacked anyone not ready to acknowledge them as the 
crown of creation, and who strangled all opposition by calling it philistine 
and backward. People trembled in fear, lest these half-wits and swindlers 
accuse them of lacking in artistic appreciation—as if it were some disgrace 
not to understand the effusions of those spiritual degenerates and slimy 
swindlers. 

These cultural disciples, however, had a very simple way of presenting 
their own nonsense as works of the highest quality. They offered 
incomprehensible and manifestly crazy stuff to their amazed contemporaries 


270 


CHAPTER 10 


as a so-called inner experience. Thus they forestalled all negative criticism 
at very little cost. Of course nobody ever doubted that there could have been 
inner experiences like that; the doubt was regarding the justification for 
exposing these hallucinations of lunatics and criminals to healthy human 
society. The works produced by a Moritz von Schwind or a Bécklin were 
also an inner experience, but these were the experiences of divinely gifted 
artists and not of buffoons.’ 

This situation offered a good opportunity to study the miserable 
cowardliness of our so-called intellectuals, who shirked the duty of resisting 
the poisoning of the healthy instincts of our people. They left it to the 
people themselves to deal with this impudent nonsense. Lest they be 
considered as understanding nothing of art, the people accepted every 
mockery of art, until they finally lost the power to judge what is truly good 
or bad. All in all, there were plenty of signs that times were getting very 
bad. 


10.24 MODERN MASSES OF HUMANITY 


Still another critical symptom has to be considered. 

In the course of the 19'* century, our towns and cities began to lose 
their character as centers of civilization, and became more and more centers 
of habitation. In our great modern cities, the proletarian man doesn’t show 
much attachment to the place where he lives. This feeling results from the 
fact that his town is nothing but an accidental abode. The feeling is also 
partly due to the frequent change of residence that’s forced upon him by 
social conditions; there’s no time to form a bond to the place in which he 
lives. And yet another reason lies in the cultural barrenness and 
superficiality of our present-day cities. 

At the time of the Wars of Liberation,® our German towns and cities 
were not only small in number but also very modest in size. The few that 
could be called great cities were mostly the residential cities of princes; as 
such, they almost always had a definite cultural value and cultural aspect. 
Those few towns of more than 50,000 inhabitants were, in comparison with 
modern cities of the same size, rich in scientific and artistic treasures. At 


7 Von Schwind (1804-1871) was an Austrian painter who spent much of his 
career in Munich. Amold Boécklin (1827-1901) was a Swiss painter in the classic 
style. 


8 Circa 1813. 


271 


MEIN KAMPF 


the time when Munich had not more than 60,000 souls, it was already well 
on the way to become one of the first German centers of art. Nowadays 
almost every industrial town has a population at least as large as that, without 
having anything of real value to call its own. They are masses of tenement 
houses and apartments, and nothing more. It’s a mystery how anyone could 
grow sentimentally attached to such a meaningless place. No one can bond 
to a place that offers no more than any other place would offer, that has no 
character of its own, and where pains have obviously been taken to avoid 
everything that might have any resemblance to an artistic appearance. 

But that’s not all. Even great cities become more barren of real works 
of art the more they increase in population. They assume more and more a 
neutral atmosphere, and present the same aspect, though on a larger scale, 
as the poor little factory towns. Everything that our modern age has 
contributed to the civilization of our great cities is absolutely deficient. All 
our cities are living on the glory and the treasures of the past. If we take 
away from the Munich of today everything that was created under Ludwig 
I, we would be horror-stricken to see how meager has been the output of 
important artistic creations since that time.? One could say the same of 
Berlin and most of our other great cities. 

But the following is the essential point: Our great modern cities have 
no outstanding monuments that dominate the city, ones that could be 
pointed to as symbols of a whole epoch. Yet almost every ancient town had 
a monument erected to its glory. It wasn’t in private dwellings that the 
characteristic art of ancient cities was displayed, but in the public 
monuments, which were not meant to have a transitory interest but an 
enduring one. And this was because they didn’t represent the wealth of 
some individual citizen, but rather the greatness and wealth of the 
community. Thus it was that those monuments arose that bound the 
individual inhabitants to their own town in a way that’s almost 
incomprehensible to us today. What struck the eye of the ancient citizen 
wasn’t a number of mediocre private buildings, but imposing structures 
that belonged to the whole community. Compared to them, private 
dwellings were of only very secondary importance. 

When we compare the size of those ancient public buildings with that 
of the private dwellings, then we can understand the great importance that 
was given to the principle that communal works should take precedence 


° Ludwig I, King of Bavaria (1786-1868), made Munich a major art center 
during the time of his rule, from 1825 to 1848. 


272 


CHAPTER 10 


over all others. What we today admire in the ruins of the ancient world 
aren’t the former commercial palaces but rather temples and public 
structures. The community itself was the owner of those great works. Even 
in the pomp of late Rome, it wasn’t the villas and palaces of some citizens 
that filled the most prominent place but rather the temples and the baths, 
the stadiums, the circuses, the aqueducts, the basilicas, etc., which belonged 
to the state, and therefore to the whole people. 

In medieval Germany the same principle held sway, although the 
artistic outlook was quite different. In ancient times, that which found its 
expression in the Acropolis or the Pantheon was now cloaked in the forms 
of the Gothic cathedral. These monumental structures towered gigantically 
above the swarm of smaller buildings, with their framework walls of wood 
and brick. And they remain the dominant feature of these cities even today, 
although they are becoming more and more obscured by apartment 
buildings. They determine the character and appearance of the town. 
Cathedrals, city halls, corn exchanges, and defense towers are the outward 
expression of an idea that’s based in the ancient world. 

And how deplorable has the relationship become today between our 
state and private buildings! If a similar fate should befall Berlin as did 
Rome, future generations might gaze upon the ruins of some Jewish 
department stores or corporate hotels and think that these were the 
characteristic expressions of the culture of our time. In Berlin itself, just 
compare the shameful disproportion between the buildings of the Reich 
and those of trade and finance. 

Funding for public buildings are, in most cases, inadequate and 
ridiculous. They aren’t built for eternity, but mostly for responding to the 
need of the moment. No higher idea influenced such buildings. When the 
Berlin Palace was built, it had a quite different significance from what the 
new library has for our time. One battleship alone represents an expenditure 
of about 60 million marks, whereas less than half that sum was allotted for 
the building of the Reichstag—which is the most imposing structure erected 
for the Reich, and which should have been built to last for ages. Yet, when 
the question of internal decoration arose, the Upper House voted against 
the use of stone and ordered that the walls should be covered with stucco. 
For once, however, the parliamentarians made an appropriate decision; 
plaster heads would be out of place within stone walls. 

The community per se is not the dominant characteristic of our 
contemporary cities, and therefore it’s no surprise that the community finds 
itself architecturally underrepresented. Thus we must eventually arrive at 


273 


MEIN KAMPF 


a state of desolation—with the practical effect that the individual citizen is 
totally indifferent to the fate of his city. 

This too is a sign of our cultural decay and general collapse. Our era is 
entirely preoccupied with pointless little things, or rather, with the service 
of money. Therefore it’s little wonder that, with the worship of such an idol, 
a sense of heroism entirely disappears. But the present is only reaping what 
the past has sown. 


10.25 RELIGIOUS CONDITIONS 


All these symptoms of decay must be attributed to the lack of a definite 
and uniformly accepted worldview, and the subsequent general uncertainty 
of attitude toward the great questions of the time. This accounts for the 
habit of doing everything half-way, beginning with the educational system, 
the reluctance to undertake responsibilities, and finally, the cowardly 
tolerance of recognized abuses. Humanitarian garbage became the fashion. 
And in weakly submitting to these aberrations and sparing individual 
feelings, the future of millions was sacrificed. 

An examination of the religious situation before the war shows that the 
general process of disintegration was growing. A large part of the nation 
itself had, for a long time already, ceased to have any convictions of a 
uniform and effective worldview. In this matter, the main point was by no 
means the number of people who renounced their church membership, but 
rather the widespread indifference. While both Christian denominations 
maintain missions in Asia and Africa in order to win new followers—with 
only modest success compared to the growth of Islam—these same 
denominations were losing millions and millions of adherents at home in 
Europe. These former adherents either gave up all religion or adopted their 
own interpretation. The consequences, particularly in morality, are not good. 

It must be noted too that the attack on the dogmatic foundations of the 
various churches became increasingly violent. And yet our world would be 
inconceivable without the practical existence of a religious faith. The great 
masses of a nation are not philosophers. For the masses of people, faith is 
the only basis of morality. The various substitutes that have been offered 
haven’t shown any results that would justify replacing existing faiths. 

Butif religious teaching and faith are accepted by the masses, then the 
absolute authority of religious doctrines would be the foundation of all 
practical effort. There may be a few hundred thousand superior men who 


274 


CHAPTER 10 


can live wisely and intelligently without depending on social norms, but 
millions of others cannot. For them, the role of social norms corresponds 
to everyday life in the same way that laws relate to the state, and dogma to 
religion. 

The purely intellectual idea is, of itself, a variable thing that is subject 
to endless interpretations. It’s only through dogma that it has a precise and 
concrete form, without which religious couldn’t become a living faith. 
Otherwise the intellectual idea would never become anything more than a 
mere metaphysical concept, or rather, a philosophical opinion. The attack 
against dogma is comparable to an attack against the general laws on which 
the state is founded. Such a political attack would lead, in the end, to 
complete political anarchy if it were successful; in the same way, an attack 
on dogma would lead to a worthless religious nihilism. 

A political leader shouldn’t estimate the value of a religion by taking 
its shortcomings into account, but rather by virtue of a demonstrably better 
substitute. Until such a substitute is available, only fools or criminals would 
think of abolishing that which exists. 

Undoubtedly no small amount of blame for the present unsatisfactory 
religious situation must be attributed to those who have encumbered the 
religious ideal with purely material accessories; this gave rise to an utterly 
futile conflict between religion and so-called exact science.. In this conflict, 
victory will nearly always be on the side of science, though perhaps after 
a hard struggle. And religion will thus suffer heavily in the eyes of those 
who can’t penetrate beyond mere superficial knowledge. 


10.26 POLITICAL MISUSE OF RELIGION 


But the greatest damage of all has come from the misuse of religion as 
a means to serve political interests. In truth, we can’t attack hard enough 
those wretched criminals who would prefer to make religion provide 
political, or rather business, services for them. The impudent liars who do 
this profess their faith before the whole world in stentorian tones, so that 
all sinners may hear—not that they are ready to die for it, but rather that 
they may live all the better. They are ready to sell their faith for a single 
political swindle. For ten parliamentary mandates, they would ally 
themselves with the Marxists, who are the mortal foes of all religion. And 
for a seat in the cabinet, they would enter into marriage with the devil—if 
the latter hadn’t still retained some traces of decency. 


275 


MEIN KAMPF 


If religious life in pre-war Germany left a bad taste in many mouths, it 
was because Christianity was abused by a so-called ‘Christian’ party. They 
shamelessly attempted to identify the Catholic faith with a political party. 

This false association was a disaster. It procured some worthless 
parliamentary mandates for a bunch of good-for-nothings, but the Church 
suffered damage. 

The consequences of that situation had to be borne by the whole nation. 
The slackening of religious life occurred at a point when everything was 
beginning to waver and vacillate, and the traditional foundations of ethics 
and of morality were threatening to collapse. 

Even then, all those cracks and rifts in the national body might not have 
been dangerous if no grave burdens arose. But they became disastrous 
when the internal solidarity of the nation was the most decisive factor in 
withstanding the storm of events. 


10.27 AIMLESSNESS OF GERMAN POLICY 


In the political field also, observant eyes might have noticed certain 
evils of the Reich that foretold disaster, unless some change and correction 
took place in time. The lack of orientation in German policy, both domestic 
and foreign, was obvious to everyone who was not purposely blind. The 
best thing that can be said about the business of compromise is that it seems 
to be in harmony with Bismarck’s axiom that ‘politics is the art of the 
possible.’ But there was a small but crucial difference between Bismarck 
and the later German chancellors. This difference allowed the former to 
apply that formula to the very essence of his policy, while in the mouths of 
the others, it took on an utterly different meaning. When he uttered that 
phrase, Bismarck meant to say that, in order to attain a definite political 
end, all possible means should be employed—or at least, taken into 
account. But his successors saw in that phrase only a solemn declaration 
that one need not be bound to any political goals or ideas at all. And the 
political leaders of the Reich at that time had no far-seeing policy. Here 
again, the necessary foundation was lacking, namely, a definite worldview. 
And they also lacked the clear insight into the laws of political development 
that is a necessary quality in political leadership. 

Many who took a gloomy view of things at that time condemned the 
lack of ideas and orientation that were evident in the policy of the Reich. 
They recognized the inner weakness and futility of this policy. But such 


276 


CHAPTER 10 


people played only a secondary role in politics. The official government 
authorities were quite indifferent to such principles of civil wisdom as those 
of Houston Stewart Chamberlain;! our current leaders still do the same. 
These people are too stupid to think for themselves. They are too conceited 
to learn from others—a fact that confirms Oxenstierna’s saying, “The world 
is governed by a mere fraction of wisdom.”'! And indeed, nearly every civil 
servant embodies only an atom of this fraction. 

But since Germany became a Republic, even this modicum is lacking. 
That’s why they had to pass the Law for the Defense of the Republic, which 
prohibits expressing such views, or even thinking them. Oxenstierna was 
lucky to live when he did, and not in our wise Republic. 


10.28 PARLIAMENTARY HALF-MEASURES 


Even before the war, the institution that should have represented the 
strength of the Reich was recognized by many as its greatest weakness: the 
parliament, the Reichstag. Here, cowardice and irresponsibility were 
completely unified. 

One of the most foolish ideas that one hears today is that, in Germany, 
the parliamentary institution has gone wrong ‘since the revolution.’ This 
too easily implies that the case was different before the revolution. But in 
reality, its effect was highly destructive—and this was true even in those 
days when people saw nothing, or didn’t wish to see anything. The German 
downfall can be attributed, in no small degree, to this institution. But that 
the catastrophe didn’t take place sooner is not to be credited to the 
parliament, but rather to those who opposed the influence of this institution 
which, during peace times, was digging the grave of the German nation 
and the German Reich. 

From the immense number of devastating evils that were due either 
directly or indirectly to the parliament, I’1l pick one of the most typical of 
this institution that was the most irresponsible of all time: the terrible half- 
heartedness and weakness of the political leaders in conducting the internal 
and external affairs of the Reich. This was primarily attributable to the 


10 Chamberlain (1855-1927) was born in England but spent the majority of his 
adult life in Germany. He was a prominent intellectual of the day; his best- 
known work, Foundations of the 19th Century, was highly influential to Hitler. 
1 Axel Oxenstierna (1583-1654) was prime minister of Sweden. But the saying 
seems to be apocryphal. 


277 


MEIN KAMPF 


action of the Reichstag, and was one of the principal causes of the political 
collapse. 

Everything subject to the influence of parliament was done in half- 
measures, no matter how you look at it. 

The foreign policy of the Reich in the matter of alliances was an 
example of such half-heartedness. They wanted to maintain peace, but in 
doing so they steered straight into war. 

Their Polish policy was also carried out by half-measures. One merely 
irritated without ever finishing anything. It resulted neither in a German 
triumph nor Polish conciliation, and it made enemies of the Russians. 

They tried to solve the Alsace-Lorraine question through half-measures. 
Instead of crushing the French hydra’s head once and for all with a brutal 
fist, and then granting Alsace-Lorraine equal rights, they did neither. Nor 
could they have done otherwise, for the biggest parties had among their 
ranks the biggest traitors—in the Center, for example, Mr. Wetterlé.!” 


10.29 PARLIAMENTARY CRIMES AGAINST THE ARMY 


But all this would have been bearable, if the half-heartedness hadn’t 
extended to that one power that was ultimately responsible for the survival 
of the Reich: the army. 

The sins committed by the so-called German Reichstag were sufficient 
to draw down upon it the curses of the German nation for all time. On the 
most miserable of pretexts, these parliamentary henchmen filched from 
the hands of the nation its weapon of self-defense—the only thing 
protecting the liberty and independence of our people. If the graves of 
Flanders were to open today, bloodstained accusers would arise: hundreds 
of thousands of our best German youth, who, poorly- or half-trained, were 
driven into the arms of death by those conscienceless parliamentary 
criminals. Those youths, and other millions of the dead and mutilated, 
were lost to the Fatherland simply and solely in order that a few hundred 
deceivers of the people might carry out their political swindles and 
blackmail, or merely rattle off their doctrinaire theories. 

While the Jews, in their Marxist and democratic press, spread the 
colossal falsehood about ‘German militarism’ throughout the world and 


12 Emile Wetterlé (1861-1931) was a French Catholic politician who founded the 
Alsatian Nationalist Party in 1910. 


278 


CHAPTER 10 


tried to incriminate Germany by every possible means, at the same time 
the Marxist and democratic parties obstructed measures that were necessary 
for the adequate training of our national defenses. The appalling crime thus 
committed by these people ought to have been obvious to everyone who 
could see that, in case of war, the whole nation would be called to arms. 
Furthermore, because of the huckstering of these so-called ‘representatives 
of the people,’ millions of Germans would have to face the enemy ill- 
equipped and insufficiently trained. But even apart from the consequences 
of the brutal unscupulousness of these parliamentarian scoundrels, it was 
quite clear that the lack of properly trained soldiers at the beginning of a 
war would likely lead to defeat; and this probability was confirmed, in a 
most terrible way, during the course of the World War. 

The German people lost the struggle for the freedom and independence 
of their country because of the half-hearted and defective policy employed 
during peacetime, in the organization and training of the defensive strength 
of the Fatherland. 


10.30 FAILED NAVAL POLICY 


The number of recruits trained for the land forces was too small. But 
the same half-heartedness was shown in regard to the navy, and it made 
this weapon of national self-preservation more or less worthless. 
Unfortunately, even the naval authorities themselves were infected with 
this spirit of half-heartedness. The tendency to build all ships somewhat 
smaller than the British didn’t show much foresight, and less genius. A fleet 
that can’t achieve the same numerical strength as the enemy should 
compensate by the superior fighting power of the individual ship. It’s 
superior fighting power that counts, and not any sort of traditional ‘quality.’ 
As a matter of fact, modern technical development is so advanced and so 
well proportioned among the various civilized states, that it must be looked 
on as practically impossible for one power to gain any appreciable fighting 
advantage over enemy ships of a similar size. And it’s even less feasible to 
build ships of smaller size that will be superior in action to those of larger 
ones. 

As a matter of fact, the smaller proportions of the German ships could 
be maintained only at the expense of speed and armament. The phrase 
used to justify this policy was in itself evidence of the lack of logical 
thinking on the part of the naval authorities who were in charge of these 


279 


MEIN KAMPF 


matters in peacetime. They declared, for example, that the 28 cm German 
guns were definitely superior to the British 30.5 cm, in terms of 
performance!! 

But that was just why they should have adopted a policy of building 
30.5 cm guns as well; they should have aimed not for equality but 
superiority in fighting strength. Otherwise it would have been superfluous 
to equip the land forces with 42 cm mortars. The German 21 cm mortar 
was far superior to any high-angle French guns, and the fortresses could 
probably have been taken by means of 30.5 cm mortars. Army leadership 
calculated correctly; that of the navy, unfortunately, did not. 

If they neglected superior artillery power and speed, it was because of 
their fundamentally false so-called ‘principle of risk.’ The naval authorities, 
from the very beginning, renounced the principle of attack, and thus had 
to follow a defensive policy. But by this attitude they also renounced any 
chance of final success, which can only be achieved by attack. 

A ship with slower speed and weaker armament will be crippled and 
battered by an adversary that is faster, stronger, and can shoot from a 
favorable distance. A large number of our cruisers have been through this 
bitter experience. The erroneous nature of prevailing ideas among naval 
authorities was proven during the war. They were compelled to modify the 
armaments of the old ships, and to equip the new ones with better 
armaments. If the German vessels in the Battle of the Skagerrak had been 
of equal size, equal armament, and equal speed as the English, the British 
Fleet would have gone down under the tempest of the more accurate and 
more effective 38 cm German shells.'* 

Japan followed a different kind of naval policy. There, care was taken 
to create every single new vessel as a superior fighting force to that of the 
presumed adversaries. As a result of this policy, it was thereafter possible 
to use the fleet for offensives. 

While the army authorities refused to adopt such fundamentally 
erroneous principles, the navy—which unfortunately had better 
‘parliamentary’ representation—succumbed to the spirit that ruled there. 
The navy was organized on the basis of half-baked ideas, and was later used 
in the same way. The immortal glory that the navy won, in spite of these 
drawbacks, must be entirely credited to the good work, efficiency, and 
incomparable heroism of officers and crews. If the former commanders-in- 


3 The Battle of Skagerrak, also known as the Battle of Jutland, occurred over 
two days in early June 1916. The German and British fleets fought to a draw. 


280 


CHAPTER 10 


chief had been inspired with the same level of genius, all sacrifices would 
not have been in vain. 

It was probably the very parliamentarian skill displayed by the naval 
chief during the years of peace that later caused the fatal collapse. 
Parliamentarian considerations had begun to play a more important role in 
the construction of the navy than military ones. The half-heartedness, 
weakness, and failure to adopt a logically consistent policy—which is 
typical of the parliamentary system—began to color the naval authorities. 

As already emphasized, army leadership didn’t allow themselves to be 
led astray by such fundamentally erroneous ideas. Ludendorff, who was 
then a colonel in the General Staff, led a desperate struggle against the 
criminal half-heartedness with which the Reichstag treated the most vital 
problems of the nation. In most cases, it voted against them. If the fight 
that this officer then waged remained unsuccessful, blame must be given 
in part to the parliament, and part to the weak and miserable attitude of the 
Reich Chancellor, Bethmann-Hollweg." Yet those who are responsible for 
Germany’s collapse don’t hesitate now to lay all the blame on the shoulders 
of the one man who alone battled this neglect of national interests; one 
swindle, more or less, is nothing to these congenital tricksters. 

Anyone who thinks of all the sacrifices that this nation had to bear as a 
result of the criminal neglect of those irresponsible individuals; anyone who 
thinks of the number of those who died or were maimed unnecessarily; anyone 
who thinks of the boundless shame and dishonor that was heaped upon us and 
of the immeasurable distress into which our people are now plunged; anyone 
who realizes that this was done simply to secure a few seats in parliament for 
some unscrupulous job-hunters and careerists—they will understand that such 
creatures can only be described by words such as ‘scoundrel,’ ‘villain,’ ‘scum,’ 
and ‘criminal’; otherwise these words have no meaning. In comparison with 
these traitors to the nation, every pimp is an honorable man. 

Oddly enough, all the real faults of the old Germany were exposed to 
the public gaze only when it served to damage the inner solidarity of the 
nation. Yes, indeed, unpleasant truths were openly proclaimed in the ears 
of the broad masses, while many other things were, at other times, 
shamefully hushed up or their existence simply denied—especially at times 
when an open discussion of such problems might have led to an 
improvement. At the same time, higher government authorities knew little 


4 Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg (1856-1921) served as German Chancellor 
from 1909 to 1917. 


281 


MEIN KAMPF 


or nothing of the value and nature of propaganda. Only the Jew knew that, 
by an able and persistent use of propaganda, heaven itself can be presented 
as hell, and vice versa, the most miserable kind of life as paradise. Only he 
knew this, and acted accordingly. But the German, or rather his 
government, hadn’t the slightest idea of this. 

During the war, we paid the heaviest of penalties for this ignorance. 


10.31 GERMAN ADVANTAGES 


Along side the innumerable evils that are mentioned here, and which 
affected German life before the war, there were many advantages. If we 
take an impartial survey, we must admit that most of our weaknesses were 
shared with other countries and peoples, and very often in a worse form 
than with us. And they didn’t possess many of our actual advantages. 

The foremost advantage was the fact that, alone among the European 
nations, the German nation made the strongest effort to preserve the 
national character of its economic structure; for this reason, it was less 
subject than others to control by international finance. And yet this was a 
dangerous advantage, one that later tumed out to be the chief cause of the 
World War. 

Aside from this and many other positive features, we must single out 
three institutions that were constant sources of regeneration. In their 
respective spheres, they were models of perfection and were partly unrivalled. 

First, the state form as such, and the manner in which it was developed 
in modern Germany. 

Of course, we must except those monarchs who, as human beings, were 
subject to the failings that afflict this earthly life and its children. If we 
weren’t so tolerant in these matters, then the case of the present generation 
would be hopeless. If we take into consideration the personal capabilities 
and character of the representative figures in our present regime, it would 
be difficult to imagine a more modest level of intelligence and moral 
character. If we measure the ‘value’ of the German revolution by the 
personal worth and stature of the individuals whom this revolution has 
given to the German people since November 1918, then we may feel truly 
ashamed at how posterity will pass judgement, given that protective laws 
can no longer silence public opinion. Posterity will surely say that the 
intelligence and integrity of our new German leaders were in adverse ratio 
to their boasting and their vices. 


282 


CHAPTER 10 


It must be admitted that the monarchy had become alien in spirit to 
many citizens, and especially the broad masses. This resulted from the fact 
that the monarchs were not always surrounded by the brightest minds, so 
to say, and certainly not always by the sincerest minds. Unfortunately many 
of them preferred flatterers to plain-spoken men, and hence received their 
‘instruction’ from the former. This was a grave danger at a time when many 
of the world’s old opinions were changing, and when this affected even the 
traditions of the court. 

The average man could not have felt any special enthusiasm when, for 
example, at the turn of the century, a princess in uniform rode at the front 
of a parade. Those in high circles apparently had no idea of the impression 
that this made on the minds of ordinary people, or it wouldn’t have 
happened. Moreover, the sentimental humanitarianism—not always very 
sincere—that was professed in those high circles was often more repulsive 
than attractive. When, for instance, Princess X decided to taste the products 
of a soup kitchen and found them excellent, as usual, such a gesture might 
have made a good impression in times past; but now it had the opposite 
effect. Even if we take it for granted that Her Highness didn’t have the 
slightest idea that, on the day she sampled it, the food was not quite the 
same as on other days, it sufficed that the people knew it. 

Even the best of intentions thus became an object of ridicule or a cause 
of exasperation. 

Stories of the monarch’s proverbial frugality, his early rise in the 
morning, the drudgery he had to go through all day long until late at night, 
and especially the constant fear that he might become undernourished, all 
aroused dubious comments. No one was eager to know what and how much 
the monarch ate or drank. No one begrudged him a full meal, or the 
necessary amount of sleep. Everyone was pleased when the monarch, as a 
man and a personality, brought honor on his family and his country, and 
fulfilled his duties as a ruler. All the legends that were circulated about him 
helped little, and in fact did much damage. 

These and such things, however, are only mere trifles. What was much 
worse was the feeling, spread throughout large sections of the nation, that 
the affairs of the individual were being taken care of from above, and that 
he needn’t bother himself with them. As long as the government was really 
good, or at least moved by goodwill, no serious objections could be raised. 
But woe to all if the old government of good intentions were replaced by 
a new one that was not so decent. Then the public’s docile obedience and 
childlike faith were the most fatal of evils imaginable. 


283 


MEIN KAMPF 


But against these and other defects, there were many unquestionable 
assets. 

For one thing, the monarchical form guarantees stability in the entire state 
leadership, and safeguards public offices from the speculative turmoil of 
ambitious politicians. Furthermore, the dignified tradition that this institution 
possesses gives weight to monarchical authority. Beyond this, there is the fact 
that the whole corps of officials, and the army in particular, are raised above 
the level of party obligations. And still another advantage was that the supreme 
rulership of the state was embodied in the monarch as an individual person, 
and whose example of personal responsibility was stronger than that of any 
anonymous parliamentary majority. Indeed, the proverbial integrity of the 
German administration must be attributed chiefly to this fact. Finally, the high 
cultural function of the monarch compensated for many of its defects. The 
German court cities have remained, even to our time, centers of an artistic 
spirit that now threatens to disappear in our materialistic age. The German 
princes did a great deal for art and science, especially during the 19" century. 
Our present age certainly has nothing to compare with it. 


10.32 THE ARMY—AN IRREPLACEABLE SCHOOL 


During that process of disintegration that was slowly extending 
throughout the social order, the most positive force of resistance was the 
army. This was the strongest school of the German nation, and for that 
reason, the hatred of our enemies was directed against this buttress of 
national freedom and independence. The strongest testimony in favor of 
this unique institution is the fact that it was derided, hated, combated, and 
also feared, by all inferior peoples. The fact that the international exploiters 
of our people, who gathered at Versailles, directed their enmity especially 
against the old German army proved once again that it deserved to be 
regarded as the defender of our national freedom against the power of the 
stock exchange.> Without this warning power, the intentions of Versailles 
would have long since been carried out. There is only one word to express 
what the German people owe to this army: everything. 

It was the army that still promoted a sense of responsibility among the 
people when this quality was becoming very rare, and when the habit of 
'S The Treaty of Versailles was signed in June 1919, after the end of World War 


L It imposed onerous and impossible conditions upon Germany, and falsely 
attributed full blame for the war to them. 


284 


CHAPTER 10 


evading it was steadily spreading. This habit had grown up under the 
influences of parliament, which was itself the very model of 
irresponsibility. The army trained the people to personal courage at a time 
when cowardice threatened to become an epidemic, when the spirit of 
sacrificing for the good of the community was considered as little more 
than stupidity, and when only those considered intelligent were the ones 
who promoted their own ego. The army was the school by which individual 
Germans were taught not to seek the salvation of their nation in the false 
ideology of international brotherhood between negroes, Germans, Chinese, 
French, English, etc., but in the strength and unity of their own people. 

The army developed the individual’s powers of resolve, and this at a 
time when a spirit of indecision and skepticism governed human affairs. 
In an age when the know-it-alls were everywhere setting the fashion, it 
needed courage to uphold the principle that any command is better than 
none. This one principle represents a robust and sound style of thought, 
one that would have vanished had the army not furnished a constant 
renewal of this fundamental force. A sufficient proof of this may be found 
in the appalling lack of decision that our present Reich authorities display. 
They can’t shake off their mental and moral lethargy, and take definitive 
action, except when it comes to enforced decrees for exploiting the people. 
In that case they decline all responsibility, while at the same time they 
sign everything that the other side places before them, with the agility of 
a court stenographer. In this case, the decision is easy to make; it’s dictated 
to them. 

The army trained its men with a spirit of idealism and devotion to the 
Fatherland, while greed and materialism dominated everywhere else. The 
army united a people who were divided into classes; and in this respect had 
only one defect, which was the voluntary one-year military service. It was 
a mistake because the principle of absolute equality was thereby violated. 
Those who had a better education were thus placed outside the setting of 
their general environment. 

The opposite would have been better. Since our upper classes were 
really ignorant of the corporate body of the nation, and were becoming 
increasingly estranged from it, the army could have had a very positive 
effect if it had refused to segregate the so-called intellectuals, especially 
within its own ranks. It was a mistake that this wasn’t done. But what 
institution in this world makes no mistakes? And in the army, the good 
features were so absolutely predominant that the few defects it had were 
far below the average that generally arise from human weakness. 


285 


MEIN KAMPF 


But the greatest credit earned by the army was that, at a time when the 
individual person counted for nothing and the majority was everything, it 
placed individual personal values above majority values. Confronted with 
the Jewish-democratic idea of a blind faith in numbers, the army defended 
its belief in personality. Thus it trained that which was most needed at the 
time: real men. In a period when men were falling into a morass of 
effeminacy and softness, 350,000 vigorous young men were trained each 
year. In the course of their two years’ training, they lost the softness of their 
young days and developed bodies as tough as steel. The young man who 
had been taught obedience during this time was now ready to command. 
One could recognize the trained soldier by his very walk. 

This was the great school of the German nation. It was not without 
reason that it drew all the bitter hatred of those who wanted the Reich to 
be weak and defenseless. The rest of the world recognized a fact that many 
Germans didn’t wish to see, either due to blindness or ill will: the German 
army was the most powerful weapon for the freedom of the German nation, 
and the best guarantee for the sustenance of its children. 


10.33 THE INCOMPARABLE CIVIL SERVICE 


There was a third institution of value that has to be placed beside the 
monarchy and the army; this was the civil service of the old Reich. 

Germany was the best organized and best administered country in the 
world. There may have been objections to the bureaucratic red tape, but from 
this point of view, the other countries were no better; and often worse. But 
the other states didn’t have the wonderful German solidarity, nor were their 
civil servants of the same incorruptible honesty. It’s certainly better to be a 
little old-fashioned but honest and loyal, than to be over-sophisticated and 
modern, with inferior character, and thus typically ignorant and inefficient. 

If it be said today that the pre-war German administration was 
bureaucratically excellent but incompetent from a business point of view, 
I can only give the following reply: What other country in the world 
possessed a better-organized and administered business enterprise than the 
German State Railways? It was left to the revolution to destroy this 
exemplary organization, until a time came when it was taken out of the 
hands of the nation and socialized, in the sense of this Republic’s founders. 
This made it subservient to the international stock exchange, who were the 
power behind the German revolution. 


286 


CHAPTER 10 


The most outstanding trait of the civil service and entire administrative 
apparatus was their independence from the government, whose passing 
views had no effect on the role of German state officials. Since the 
revolution, this situation has been completely changed. Efficiency and 
capability have been replaced by party ties, and independence of character 
and initiative are more of a hindrance than a help. 


10.34 STATE AUTHORITY 


The wonderful might and power of the old Reich was based on the 
monarchical state-form, the army, and the civil service. On these three 
foundations rested that great strength that’s now entirely lacking: State authority! 
For this cannot be based on the babbling that goes on in parliament or in the 
provincial diets, or upon laws made to protect the state, or upon sentences passed 
by the law courts to frighten those insolently deny it, but only on the general 
confidence placed in the leaderhsip and administration of the community. This 
confidence is in its tum nothing else than an unshakable inner conviction that 
the govemment and administration of a country is inspired by selflessness and 
honesty, and on agreement between the spirit of the law and the general moral 
convictions of the people. In the long run, systems of government are not 
maintained by threats of violence but on the belief of the people in the merits 
and sincerity of those who administer and promote the public interests. 

Though in the pre-war period, certain grave evils tended to infect and 
corrode the inner strength of the nation, it must be remembered that the 
other states suffered even more than Germany from these drawbacks. And 
yet they didn’t fail and breakdown when the time of crisis came. If we 
remember further that those defects in pre-war Germany were outweighed 
by great positive qualities, we'll have to look elsewhere for the effective 
cause of the collapse. And this is actually the case. 

The ultimate and most profound reason for the German decline is the 
fact that the racial problem was ignored, and that its importance in the 
historical development of nations wasn’t grasped. Events that take place 
in the life of nations are not due to chance, butare the natural results of the 
effort to conserve and multiply the species and the race—even if people 
aren’t conscious of the inner motives of their conduct. 


287 


CHAPTER 11: 
NATION AND RACE 


Certain truths are so obvious that, for this very reason, they are neither 
seen nor recognized by ordinary people. People are so blind to some of the 
simplest facts in everyday life that they are very surprised when someone 
calls attention to what everyone should know. Examples of the Columbus 
Egg surround us by the hundreds of thousands; but Columbuses are rare.! 

Walking around in the garden of Nature, most men have the conceit to 
think that they know everything. Yet almost all are blind to one of the 
outstanding principles that Nature employs in her work: the inner 
separation of the species of all living beings on Earth. 

Even a superficial glance shows that nature follows a rigid basic law 
in which all life-forms are restricted to definite limits when propagating 
and multiplying their own kind. Each animal mates only with one of its 
own species. The titmouse seeks the titmouse, the finch with the finch, the 
stork with the stork, the field mouse with the field mouse, the house mouse 
with the house mouse, the wolf with the she-wolf, etc. 

Deviations from this law take place only in exceptional circumstances, 
such as the compulsion of captivity, or when some other obstacle makes 
intercourse impossible between members of the same species. But then 
Nature resists such intercourse with all her might. Her protest is most 
clearly demonstrated by the fact that the hybrid is either sterile or its 
descendants have limited fertility. In most cases, they are denied the 
ordinary powers of resistance to disease or to hostile attacks. 


' The Columbus Egg refers to an apocryphal tale in which Christopher 
Columbus allegedly challenged a group of Spanish noblemen to balance an egg 
on one end. After they fail, he takes the egg, taps it on the table to slightly crush 
one end, and then it stands. The moral is that a seemingly impossible task, once 
done in acertain way, becomes obvious. Many inventions and discoveries are 
precisely of this nature. 


289 


MEIN KAMPF 


This is only too natural. 

Every crossing between two breeds that aren’t quite equal yields a 
product that holds an intermediate place between the levels of the two 
parents. This means that the offspring will indeed be superior to the racially 
inferior parent, but not as high as the higher parent. For this reason, it must 
eventually succumb in any struggle against the higher species. Such mating 
contradicts the will of nature towards the selective improvements of life in 
general. The precondition to this improvement is not to mate superior and 
inferior, but rather to allow the complete triumph of the higher order. The 
stronger must dominate and not mate with the weaker, thus sacrificing its 
own greatness. Only the born weakling can look upon this principle as cruel, 
but he is only a feeble and limited man; for if such a law did not prevail, 
then the higher development of organic life would be inconceivable. 

The consequence of this urge for racial purity, universally valid in 
nature, is not only the sharply-defined outward distinction between the 
races but also their uniform character in themselves. The fox is always a 
fox, the goose is a goose, the tiger is a tiger, etc. The only difference that 
can exist within the species must be in the various degrees of force, 
strength, intelligence, efficiency, endurance, etc., of the individual 
specimens. It would be impossible to find a fox that is kindly and protective 
towards geese, just as no cat has a friendly disposition towards mice. 

That’s why the struggle between the various species doesn’t arise from 
mutual antipathy but rather from hunger, and from love. In both cases, 
Nature looks on calmly, and even with satisfaction. The struggle for daily 
bread leaves behind all those who are weak or sickly or wavering, while 
the male struggle for the female gives to the healthiest the right to 
propagate. And this struggle is a means of furthering the species’ health 
and powers of resistance, and therefore its higher development. 

If the case were different, progress would cease, and even regression 
would occur. Since the inferior always outnumber the superior, the former 
would always increase more rapidly if they possessed the same capacities 
for survival and reproduction. The end result would be that the best would 
be driven into the background. Therefore a corrective measure in favor of 
the better must intervene. Nature supplies this by establishing rigorous 
living conditions, to which the weaker will have to submit and will thereby 
be numerically restricted. But even the portion that survives cannot 
reproduce indiscriminately, for here a new and rigorous selection takes 
place, according to strength and health. 


290 


CHAPTER 11 


11.1 THE RESULT OF RACIAL MIXING 


If Nature doesn’t wish that weaker individuals should mate with the 
stronger, even less does she wish that a superior race should mix with an inferior 
one. In such a case, all her efforts, throughout hundreds of thousands of years, 
to establish an evolutionary higher type of being, might be rendered futile. 

History provides countless proofs of this law. It shows, with a startling 
clarity, that whenever Aryans have mingled their blood with that of an 
inferior race, the result has been the downfall of the cultured people. In 
North America, where the population is predominantly Germanic, and 
where those elements intermingled with the colored peoples only to a very 
small degree, there is a different humanity and culture than those of Central 
and South America. In these latter countries, the Latin immigrants mated 
with the aborigines, sometimes on a large scale. In this case we have a clear 
and decisive example of the effect of racial mixing. But in North America, 
the Germanic element, which has remained racially pure and unmixed, has 
come to dominate the American continent. And it will remain master, as 
long as that element doesn’t fall victim to a defiling of the blood. 

In short, the results of racial mixing are always the following: 

(a) The level of the superior race becomes lowered; and 

(b) Physical and mental degeneration sets in, thus leading slowly but 
surely towards a progressive sickness. 

Such a development is nothing other than a sin against the will of the 
eternal Creator. 

And as a sin, this act will be avenged. 

Man’s effort to contradict the iron logic of nature brings him into 
conflict with those principles to which he himself owes his own existence. 
By acting against nature, he prepares the way for his own ruin. 


11.2 MAN AND IDEA 


Here we meet an insolent pacifist objection, one that is Jewish in its 
inspiration: “Man can control even nature!” 

There are millions who mindlessly repeat this Jewish nonsense, and 
end up imagining that somehow they themselves are the conquerors of 
nature. Yet their only weapon is just a mere idea, and a very preposterous 
one at that. If one accepted it, then it would be impossible even to imagine 
the existence of the world. 


291 


MEIN KAMPF 


The real truth is that, not only has man failed to overcome nature in 
any sphere whatsoever, but that at best he has merely succeeded in getting 
hold of and lifting a tiny corner of the enormous veil she has spread over 
her eternal mysteries and secrets. He never creates anything. All he can do 
is to discover something. He doesn’t master nature, but has only come to 
be the master of those living beings who lack the knowledge he has arrived 
at, by penetrating into some of nature’s laws and mysteries. Apart from all 
this, an idea can never overcome the preconditions for the existence and 
development of mankind; the idea itself has come only from man. Without 
humanity, there would be no human idea in this world. The idea as such is 
therefore always dependent on the existence of man, and thus is dependent 
on those laws that created the conditions of his existence. 

And not only that! Certain ideas are even confined to certain people. 
This holds particularly true with regard to those ideas that have roots not 
in objective scientific truth but in the world of feeling. In other words—to 
use a current phrase that expresses this truth—they reflect an ‘inner 
experience.’ All such ideas, which have nothing to do with cold logic per 
se but represent mere feelings, such as ethical and moral conceptions, etc., 
are inextricably bound up with man’s existence. Such ideas owe their 
existence to the creative powers of man’s imagination. 

Now then, a necessary condition for the maintenance of such ideas is 
the existence of certain races and certain types of men. For example, 
anyone who sincerely wishes that the pacifist idea should prevail in this 
world should do everything possible to help the Germans conquer the 
world. If the opposite should happen, it may easily be the case that the last 
pacifist would disappear with the last German. I say this because, 
unfortunately, no one else in the world has fallen prey to this nonsense like 
our own people. Whether we liked it or not, we would have to wage war in 
order to achieve pacifism. This, and nothing less, was the plan of the 
American world-savior, Wilson.* Or at least, that was what our visionaries 
believed—and thus his goal was achieved. 

The pacifist-humanitarian ideal may indeed be an excellent one, but 
only when the most superior type of man has succeeded in subjugating the 
world to such an extent that he is the sole ruler of the Earth. This ideal would 
have evil effects only to the extent in which its application became difficult 
and finally impossible. So, first of all, the fight; and then perhaps pacifism. 
2 Woodrow Wilson, American president during World War I. It was his 
administration, heavily populated with Jewish advisers, that dictated the harsh 
terms of the Versailles Treaty. Hitler never forgave him for that. 


292 


CHAPTERI11 


If the case were different, it would mean that mankind has already 
passed the peak of its development, and thus the end wouldn’t be the 
supremacy of some moral ideal, but degeneration into barbarism and chaos. 
People may laugh at this statement. But our planet once moved through 
the ether for millions of years without men, and it may do so once again— 
if we forget that, wherever humans have reached a superior level of 
existence, it wasn’t due to the ideas of a few crazy visionaries, but by 
knowing and rigorously applying the iron laws of nature. 


11.3 RACE AND CULTURE 


All that we admire in the world today—science, art, technology, and 
inventions—are the products of the creative activities of a few peoples; and 
perhaps even originally of one race. The maintenance of civilization is 
wholly dependent on them. Should they perish, all that makes this Earth 
beautiful will descend with them into the grave. 

However much the soil, for example, can influence men, this influence 
will vary according the the particular race in question. Poor soil may 
stimulate one race to the highest achievements; in another race, it may be 
the cause of poverty and finally of malnourishment, with all its 
consequences. Though subject to external circumstances, it is the internal 
characteristics of a people that always determine the outcome. That which 
reduces one race to starvation drives another to hard work. 

All the great civilizations of the past decayed because the originally 
creative race died out, as a result of poisoning of the blood. 

The ultimate cause of such a decline is the fact that the people forgot 
that all culture depends on men, and not the reverse. In other words, to 
preserve a certain culture, the man that creates it must be preserved. 

But this preservation is bound up with the inexorable law of necessity, 
and with the right of victory of the best and strongest. 

He who would live must fight. And he who doesn’t wish to fight in this 
world of permanent struggle has no right to live. 

Such a saying may sound harsh—and so it is! Yet far harsher is the fate 
of he who believes that he can overcome nature, and thus in reality insults 
her. Distress, misery, and disease are her replies! 

Whoever ignores or misjudges the laws of race deprives himself of the 
happiness that belongs to him. He places an obstacle in the victorious path 
of the superior race and, by doing so, interferes with a precondition of all 


293 


MEIN KAMPF 


human progress. Burdened with humanitarian sentiment, he falls back to 
the realm of the helpless beast. 


11.4 THE ARYAN AS FOUNDER OF CULTURE 


It would be futile to attempt to determine which race or races were the 
original standard-bearers of human culture, and were thereby the real 
founders of all that we understand by the word ‘humanity.’ It’s much simpler 
to deal with this question insofar as it relates to the present time. Here the 
answer is simple and clear. Every manifestation of human culture, every 
product of art, science, and technical skill that we see today, are almost 
exclusively the creative product of the Aryan. This very fact fully justifies 
the conclusion that it was the Aryan alone who founded a superior type of 
humanity; therefore he represents the archetype of what we understand by 
the term ‘man.’ He is the Prometheus of mankind, from whose shining brow 
the divine spark of genius has at all times flashed forth, always kindling 
anew the fire that, in the form of knowledge, illuminated the dark night by 
drawing aside the veil of mystery, showing man how to rise up and become 
master over all the other earthly beings. Exclude him—and a profound 
darkness will descend upon the Earth. Within a few thousand years, human 
culture will vanish and the world will become a desert. 

If we divide mankind into three groups—founders of culture, bearers 
of culture, and destroyers of culture—the Aryan alone can be considered 
as representing the first group. It was he who erected the foundation and 
walls of every great structure in human culture. Only the shape and color 
of such structures can be attributed to the characteristics of the various 
peoples. The Aryan furnished the great building stones and plans for the 
edifices of all human progress; only the execution of these plans can be 
attributed to the qualities of each individual race. 

Within a few decades, the whole of eastern Asia, for instance, will 
possess a culture was founded by the Greek mind and Germanic 
technology. Only the external form—at least partly—shows the traits of 
Asiatic inspiration. It isn’t true, as some believe, that Japan adds European 
technology to its own culture. The truth rather is that European science and 
technology are just overlaid with the peculiar characteristics of Japanese 
civilization. The foundations of actual life in Japan today aren’t those of 
native Japanese culture, although this colors daily life and thus appears 
striking to the European eye. Rather, the real foundations are the enormous 


294 


CHAPTER 11 


scientific and technical achievements of Europe and America; that is, of 
Aryan peoples. Only on basis of these achievements can the Orient follow 
contemporary world progress. They provide the basis of the struggle for 
daily bread, and create weapons and implements for this; only the outward 
form is gradually adapted to Japanese ways of life. 

If, from today onwards, the Aryan influence on Japan ceased—if Europe 
and America collapsed—then Japan’s present progress in science and 
technology might still last for a short while. But within a few decades, the 
inspiration would dry up, native Japanese character would flourish, and 
present civilization would become fossilized and fall back into the sleep from 
which it was aroused seven decades ago by Aryan culture. Therefore, just as 
present Japanese development is due to Aryan influence, so in the distant 
past, foreign influence and spirit awakened Japanese culture of that day. 

The best proof of this is the fact that ancient Japanese civilization 
actually became fossilized and petrified. This can happen only if a people 
loses the racial nucleus that was originally creative, or if an outside 
influence is withdrawn after having awakened and maintained the initial 
cultural developments. If it be shown that a people owes the fundamental 
elements of its culture to foreign races, assimilating and elaborating such 
elements, and if subsequently that culture becomes fossilized whenever the 
external influence ceases, then such a race may be called ‘culture-bearing’ 
but never ‘culture-creating.’ 

Examining various peoples from this standpoint shows that practically 
none of them were originally culture-founding, but almost always culture- 
bearing. 

This development nearly always happens in the following way: 

Aryan tribes, often ridiculously small in number, subjugate foreign 
peoples and, stimulated by the conditions of life in the new territory 
(fertility, climatic abundance, etc.), and profiting also by the abundance of 
manual labor, they develop the intellectual and organizational faculties 
dormant in them. Within a few thousand years, or even centuries, they 
create cultures that reflect the inner characteristics of the founders—though 
modified by the special qualities of the soil and the subjugated people. 

In the end, though, the conquering race offends against the principle 
of blood purity to which they initially adhered. They begin to mix with the 
subjugated people, thus ending their own existence. Mankind’s Fall in 
Paradise has always been followed by expulsion. 

After a thousand years or more, the last visible traces of the former 
master people may then be found in a lighter tint of the skin that the blood 


295 


MEIN KAMPF 


had bequeathed to the subjugated race, and in a petrified culture that it had 
originally created. Once the blood of the bodily and spiritual conqueror got 
lost in the blood of the subjected people, the fuel for the torch of human 
progress was lost! Just as the blood of the former ruling race left a light 
nuance of color in the blood of its descendants as a token memory, so too 
the night of cultural life is gently illuminated by the products of those who 
were the original bearers of light. Their radiance shines through the 
barbarism to which the subjected race has reverted. This often leads the 
superficial observer to believe that he sees before him an image of the 
present race, when in fact he is only gazing into a mirror of the past. 

It may happen that, in the course of its history, such a people will come 
into contact a second time, or perhaps more, with the race of original 
founders of their culture. They may not even remember that distant 
association. Instinctively, though, the remnants of the master blood will be 
drawn towards this new phenomenon, and what had formerly been possible 
only under compulsion can now succeed through the people’s own will. A 
new cultural wave flows in, and lasts until the blood of its standard-bearers 
once again submerges in the blood of the conquered peoples. 

It will be the task of those who study the universal history of civilization 
to conduct research from this viewpoint, instead of allowing themselves to 
be smothered by a mass of external data—as is only too often the case with 
our present historical science. 

This short sketch of the development of the culture-bearing nations 
gives a picture of the development and activity—and the decline—of those 
who are the true culture-founders on this Earth, the Aryans themselves. 

Just as in our daily life the so-called man of genius needs a particular 
occasion, and sometimes indeed a special stimulus, to make him shine, so 
too with racial genius in the life of peoples. In the monotony of everyday 
life, even men of significance seem just like the others, and don’t rise above 
the average of their fellow men. But as soon as such men find themselves 
in a situation in which others stray or become hopeless, the humble and 
ordinary man reveals traits of genius—often to the amazement of those 
who had, until then, only known him in the pettiness of everyday life. 
That’s why a prophet only seldom counts for anything in his own country. 

War offers an excellent occasion for observing this. In times of distress, 
when the others despair, apparently harmless boys suddenly spring up and 
become heroes, with death-defying determination and an icy-cool mindset. 
If such an hour of trial hadn’t come, no one would have guessed that a hero 
lurked in the body of that beardless youth. 


296 


CHAPTER 11 


A special impulse is almost always necessary to bring genius into view. 
The sledge-hammer of fate, which strikes down the one so easily, suddenly 
strikes steel in another. And when the shell of everyday life is broken, the 
hidden core lay visible to an astonished world. The world resists. It refuses 
to believe that something seemingly so normal is suddenly so different. 
This process is repeated every time a man of outstanding quality appears. 

Though an inventor, for example, doesn’t establish his fame until the 
day of his invention, it would be a mistake to believe that the creative 
genius didn’t become alive until that moment. The spark of genius lives 
within the man who has it from the moment of birth. True genius is an 
innate quality; it can never be cultivated or learned. 

As stated already, this applies not merely to the individual but also the 
race. Peoples with creative abilities have always been fundamentally 
creative. It belongs to their very nature, even though this fact may escape 
the eyes of the superficial observer. Here, too, recognition from outside is 
only the consequence of practical achievement. The rest of the world is 
incapable of recognizing genius as such, and can only see the visible 
manifestations of genius in the form of inventions, discoveries, buildings, 
paintings, etc. But even here, a long time passes before recognition is given. 
Just as the individual person who has been endowed with the gift of genius, 
or at least talent of a very high order, cannot realize that endowment until 
prompted by special circumstances, so too in the life of nations; creative 
capacities and powers frequently have to wait until certain conditions 
stimulate them to action. 

The most obvious example of this truth is furnished by that race that 
has been, and still is, the standard-bearer of human progress: the Aryans. 
As soon as fate confronts them with special circumstances, their powers 
begin to develop progressively and to be manifested in tangible forms. The 
cultures that they create are almost always conditioned by the soil, the 
climate, and the people they subjugate. 

The last factor is the most decisive. The more primitive the technical 
conditions for cultural activity, the more necessary is the existence of manual 
labor that can be organized and employed to take the place of mechanical 
power. Had it not been possible to employ members of the inferior race, the 
Aryans would never have been in a position to take the first steps toward a 
future culture. Similarly, without the help of certain suitable animals that 
they were able to tame, they would never have come to a technology that 
has subsequently enabled them to do without these beasts. The phrase, ‘The 
Moor has done his work, the Moor can go’ has, unfortunately, a deep 


297 


MEIN KAMPF 


meaning.’ For thousands of years, the horse has been the faithful servant of 
man, helping to lay the foundations of human progress; but now the motor 
car has made the horse superfluous. In a few years to come, the horse’s 
function will cease entirely. And yet without its collaboration, man could 
scarcely have come to the stage of development where he is today. 

For the establishment of superior types of cultures, the inferior races 
were one of the most essential prerequisites. They alone could compensate 
for the lack of mechanical means, without which no progress is possible. 
The first stages of human culture were certainly not based so much on tame 
animals as on the use of inferior human beings. 

Only after subjugated races were used as slaves did a similar fate strike 
the animals, and not vice versa, as some people would like to believe. At 
first it was the conquered enemy who had to draw the plow—and only 
afterwards the horse. Only foolish pacifists can see this as a sign of human 
degradation. Such people fail to recognize that this development had to 
take place in order to reach that place where these apostles could force their 
drivel upon the world. 

Human progress is like ascending an infinite ladder. One can’t reach 
the higher levels without first having climbed the lower rungs. The Aryan 
therefore had to take the path to which reality directed him, and not that 
dreamt of by the modern pacifist. The path of reality, however, is difficult 
and hard; yet it’s the only one that finally leads to the goal that others 
envisage in their dreams. In reality, the dreamers only lead man away from 
his goal, rather than towards it. 

It was no accident that the first forms of culture arose where the Aryan 
came into contact with inferior races, subjugated them, and forced them to 
obey his command. The members of the inferior race became the first 
technical instrument in the service of a developing culture.’ 


11.5 EFFECTS OF BLOOD-MIXING 


Thus the road that the Aryan had to follow was clearly marked. As a 
conqueror, he subjugated inferior races and turned their physical powers 


3 Quoting from Schiller’s 1783 play Die Verschwoérung des Fiesko zu Genua 
(Fiesco’s Conspiracy at Genoa), Act III, Scene 4. 


4 This idea anticipates the later idea of the ‘megamachine’ as a systematic use of 
human labor to achieve social and cultural ends. See Mumford (1966). 


298 


CHAPTERI11 


into organized channels under his own leadership, forcing them to follow 
his will and aims. By imposing on them a useful, though hard, activity, he 
not only spared their lives but probably made their lives easier than they 
had been with their former so-called ‘freedom.’ While he ruthlessly 
maintained his position as their master, he not only remained master but 
he also maintained and advanced human culture. This depended exclusively 
on his inborn abilities and, therefore, on his preservation as such. 

As soon, however, as his subject began to rise up and approach the 
level of their conqueror—probably at the point when they began to use his 
language—the dividing wall between master and servant broke down. The 
Aryan neglected his own racial purity and thereby lost the right to live in 
the paradise that he himself had created. He became submerged in the racial 
mixture and gradually lost his cultural creativeness, until he finally became, 
both mentally and physically, more like the subjugated aborigines rather 
than his own ancestors. For awhile he could continue to live on the cultural 
capital that still remained; but a condition of fossilization soon set in, and 
he sank into oblivion. 

Thus cultures and empires declined, yielding their places to new 
formations. 

Blood mixture and the subsequent racial deterioration are the only 
causes of the decline of ancient civilizations. It’s never by war that nations 
are ruined, but by the loss of their powers of resistance, which are contained 
only in pure racial blood. 

Everything in this world that is not racially good is like chaff. 

Every historical event in the world is nothing but a manifestation of 
the instinct of racial self-preservation, whether for better or worse. 


11.6 SERVICE TO THE COMMUNITY 


The question of the inner causes for the dominating importance of 
Aryanism can be answered by saying it isn’t so much that they have a 
stronger survival instinct, but rather that this manifests itself in a special 
way. Considered subjectively, the will-to-live is equally strong everywhere; 
only the forms in which it is expressed are different. 

Among the most primitive organisms, the survival instinct doesn’t 
extend beyond concern for the individual ego. Egoism, as we call this 
passion, goes so far that it even includes time; the present moment is deemed 
the most important, and nothing is left to the future. The animal lives only 


299 


MEIN KAMPF 


for itself, seeking food when hungry and fighting only for its own self- 
preservation. As long as the instinct for self-preservation manifests itself in 
this way, there is no basis for the formation of a community—not even the 
most primitive form of family. Even a community of two, male and female, 
demands an extension of the instinct for self-preservation, since the 
readiness to fight for one’s own ego must be extended to the mate. The male 
sometimes provides food for the female, but in most cases both parents 
provide food for the offspring. Almost always, they are ready to protect and 
defend each other; so that here we find the first, though infinitely simple, 
form of the spirit of sacrifice. As soon as this spirit extends beyond the 
narrow limits of the family, we have the conditions under which larger 
associations, and finally even states, can be formed. 

The lowest peoples of this Earth display this quality only to a very 
small degree, so that often they don’t go beyond the formation of the family. 
With an increasing readiness to subordinate their immediate personal 
interests, the capacity develops for organizing more extensive communities. 

The readiness to sacrifice one’s personal labor and, if-necessary, even 
one’s life, for others is most highly developed in the Aryan. The greatness 
of the Aryan is not his intellect, but rather his willingness to devote all his 
faculties to the service of the community. Here the instinct for self- 
preservation has reached its noblest form. The Aryan willingly subordinates 
his own ego to the common interest and, when necessary, even sacrifices it. 

The Aryan’s peculiar ability for the building up of a culture is not 
grounded in his intellectual gifts alone. If that were so, they could only be 
destructive and could never be able to organize; the innermost essence of 
organization demands that the individual renounce his own personal opinions 
and interests, and lay both at the service of the larger group. By serving the 
common interest, he receives his reward in retum. For example, he doesn’t 
work directly for himself but makes his productive work a part of the activity 
of the group to which he belongs—not only for his own benefit, but for all. 
The spirit underlying this attitude is expressed by the word ‘work,’ which to 
him doesn’t mean earning one’s daily livelihood but rather a productive 
activity that doesn’t clash with the interests of the community. Whenever 
human activity is directed exclusively to the service of the instinct for self- 
preservation, it’s called theft, usury, robbery, burglary, etc. 

This state of mind, which forces self-interest into the background in 
favor of the community, is the first prerequisite for any true human culture. 
From this alone rises all the great works of humanity, that bring little reward 
to the creator but is a source of great blessings for posterity. It’s this spirit 


300 


CHAPTER 11 


alone that explains why a people can endure a harsh but honest existence, 
but at the same time consolidates the foundations on which the community 
exists. Every worker, every peasant, every inventor, state official, etc., who 
works without ever achieving fortune or prosperity for himself is a 
representative of this sublime idea—even though he may never become 
conscious of the profound meaning of his own activity. 

That which applies to work as the fundamental condition of human 
sustenance and the means of human progress, applies even more so to work 
done in defense of man and his culture. Giving one’s own life for the sake 
of the community is the crowning sense of sacrifice. Only in this way can 
we protect that which has been built by man, ensuring that it won’t be 
overthrown by man or destroyed by nature. 


11.7 PUREST IDEALISM, DEEPEST KNOWLEDGE 


Our German language has a word that admirably expresses this kind 
of activity: Pflichterfiillung, or the service of the community before 
individual self-sufficiency. 

To distinguish it from egoism or selfishness, we call the basic attitude 
that arises from this kind of activity—idealism. By this we signify the 
willingness of the individual to make sacrifices for the community and his 
fellow men. 

It’s of the utmost importance to insist again and again that idealism is 
not merely a superfluous expression of emotion, but rather something that 
has been, is, and always will be a necessary precondition of human 
culture—yes, even that it created the very idea of the concept of ‘human.’ 
The Aryan owes his position in the world to this kind of mentality; and to 
the world, man. From this pure spirit has arisen the creative force that, 
combining brutal fist with intellectual genius, has created the monuments 
of human culture. 

Were it not for idealism, all the faculties of the intellect, even the most 
brilliant, would be nothing but intellect itself—a mere external 
phenomenon without inner value, and never a creative force. 

Since true idealism, however, is essentially the subordination of 
individual interests and life to the community, and since the community, 
for its part, represents the prerequisite of every form of organization, this 
corresponds, in its innermost essence, with the final will of nature. This 
feeling alone makes men voluntarily acknowledge the privilege of strength 


301 


MEIN KAMPF 


and power, and thus makes them a constituent particle in that order that 
shapes and forms the whole universe. 

The purest idealism is unconsciously associated with the deepest 
knowledge. 

How true this is, and how little genuine idealism has to do with 
fantastic imagination, becomes clear the moment we ask an unspoiled 
child—a healthy boy, for example—to give his opinion. The very same boy 
who listens to the rantings of an ‘idealistic’ pacifist without understanding 
them, and even rejects them, would readily sacrifice his young life for the 
ideal of his people. 

Unconsciously, his instinct will obey the primal necessity of the 
preservation of the species, even at the cost of his individual life, and he 
will protest against the fantasies of pacifist ranters—who in reality are 
nothing better than cowardly but disguised egoists, and who contradict the 
laws of human development. Such development requires a willingness of 
the individual to sacrifice for the community, and not the morbid 
imaginings of cowardly know-it-alls and critics of nature. 

Just at the time when the idealistic attitude threatens to disappear, we 
notice a weakening of the force that founds and maintains the community, 
and is thereby a necessary precondition of culture. As soon as egoism begins 
to prevail among a people, the bonds of social order break down; and man, 
by seeking his own personal happiness, falls out of heaven and right into hell. 

Yes: Posterity will forget those who pursued only their own interests; 
but it will praise those heroes who have renounced their own happiness. 


11.8 ARYAN AND JEW 


The most striking contrast to the Aryan is the Jew. There is probably 
no other people in the world who have so developed the instinct of self- 
preservation as the so-called chosen people. The best proof of this is the 
simple fact that this race still exists. Where are another people that, in the 
course of the last 2,000 years, have undergone so few changes in mental 
outlook and character as the Jews? What other people has been involved 
in greater revolutionary changes—and yet, even after the most gigantic 
catastrophes, has emerged unchanged? What an infinitely tenacious will- 
to-live, to preserve one’s kind, is shown by that fact! 

The intellectual faculties of the Jew have been trained over thousands 
of years. Today he passes as ‘smart’; and in a certain sense, he has been so 


302 


CHAPTER 11 


throughout the ages. But his intelligence is not the result of an inner 
evolution, but rather has been shaped by the object-lessons of others. 

The human spirit cannot climb upwards without taking successive steps. 
For every step upwards, it needs the foundation of the past—which, in the 
comprehensive sense, only appears in general culture. All thinking originates, 
only to a very small degree, in personal experience. The largest part is based 
on the accumulated experiences of the past. The general level of culture 
subconsciously provides the individual with such an abundance of preliminary 
knowledge that he can thereby more easily take further steps of his own. 

The boy of today, for example, grows up among such an overwhelming 
mass of technical achievements of the last centuries that he takes for granted 
many things that, a hundred years ago, were still mysteries even to the greatest 
minds. Yet these things are of enormous importance to those who would 
understand the progress we have made in these matters, and would like to 
carry on that progress. If a man of genius from the 1820s were to arise from 
his grave today, he would find it harder to understand our present age than the 
average 15-year-old boy. He would lack an extraordinary amount of 
preliminary information that our contemporary youth receive automatically, 
so to say, as they grow up among the products of our modern culture. 

Since the Jew—for reasons that will become apparent—never had a 
culture of his own, he has always been supplied with a basis for his 
intellectual work by others. His intellect has always developed through the 
cultural achievements of those around him. 

The process has never been the reverse. 

Though the Jewish people’s instinct for self-preservation hasn’t been 
weaker but rather much stronger than among other peoples, and although 
one gets the impression that their intellectual powers are at least equal to 
those of other races, they completely lack the most essential prerequisite 
of a cultured people—the idealistic spirit. 

With the Jewish people, the readiness for sacrifice doesn’t extend 
beyond the simple instinct for individual preservation. The feeling of 
solidarity that they apparently manifest is nothing but a very primitive herd 
instinct, similar to that which is found among other organisms in this world. 
It’s a remarkable fact that this herd instinct provides mutual support only 
as long as there is acommon danger, which makes mutual assistance useful 
or inevitable. The same pack of wolves that just joined together in a 
common attack will dissolve into individuals as soon as their hunger is 
quenched. The same is true of horses, which unite to defend themselves 
against any aggressor but separate as soon as the danger is over. 


303 


MEIN KAMPF 


11.9 CONSEQUENCES OF JEWISH EGOISM 


It’s the same with the Jew. His spirit of sacrifice is only apparent. It is 
present only as long as the individual’s existence makes this an absolute 
necessity. But as soon as the common foe is conquered, the danger that 
threatened is overcome, and the prey secured, then the apparent Jewish 
harmony disappears and the original conditions return. The Jews act in 
concord only when a common danger threatens, or when a common prey 
attracts them. Where these two motives are lacking, the most brutal egoism 
appears; and these people, who had previously lived together in unity, turn 
into a bloody, fighting swarm of rats. 

If the Jews were the only people in the world, they would wallow in 
filth and mire. They would exploit and uproot one another in a bitter 
struggle—except insofar as their utter lack of the ideal of sacrifice, which 
shows itself in their cowardice, turned the struggle into comic theater. 

It would therefore be a complete mistake to infer any sense of sacrifice 
in the Jews from the fact that they stand together in a common struggle 
against—or rather, to exploit—their fellow man. 

Here again, the Jew merely follows the naked egoism of the individual. 

That’s why the Jewish State—which should be a vital organization to 
preserve or increase the race—has absolutely no territorial boundaries. The 
territorial delimitation of a state always demands a certain spirit of idealism 
on the part of the race in question, and especially a proper interpretation of 
the idea of work. A territorially delimited state cannot be established or 
maintained without a generally positive attitude towards work. If this 
attitude is lacking, then the necessary basis of a culture is also lacking. 

That’s why the Jewish people, despite their apparent intellectual 
powers, have no culture—and certainly no culture of their own. The present 
sham culture of the Jew is the product of the work of others, and this 
product is debased in his hands. 


11.10 SHAM CULTURE OF THE JEWS 


In order to correctly evaluate Jewry’s attitude toward the question of 
human culture, we must bear in mind the essential fact that there never has 
been any Jewish art, and consequently there is none today. Above all, in 
those two royal domains of art—architecture and music—Jewry has done 
nothing original. What they do achieve in the field of art is either a 


304 


CHAPTER 11 


patchwork, or intellectual theft.> The Jew essentially lacks the qualities that 
are characteristic of those creative races that are the founders of culture. 

To what extent the Jew appropriates foreign civilization—or rather 
corrupts it—is indicated by the fact that he chiefly cultivates the art that 
calls for the least original invention, namely, acting. And even here he is 
only a ‘juggler,’ or rather an imitative monkey; he lacks the final touch 
that’s necessary for true greatness. Even here, therefore, he is not a creative 
genius but rather a superficial imitator who, in spite of all his twists and 
tricks, cannot disguise the fact that there’s no inner vitality in his work. 
Here the Jewish press comes in and renders friendly assistance by shouting 
hosannas over even the most ordinary bungler—as long as he’s a Jew— 
until the rest of the world is stampeded into thinking that the object of so 
much praise must really be an artist. In reality he’s nothing more than a 
pitiful comedian. 

No; the Jew has no culture-creating abilities of any kind. There is not, 
and has never been, in him any spirit of idealism that is a necessary element 
in the higher development of mankind. His intellect will never be 
constructive, but always destructive. At best, it may serve as a stimulus in 
rare cases, but only as the archetype of “the power that always wants Evil 
and nevertheless creates the Good.’ Human progress occurs not through 
him, but in spite of him. 


11.11 THE JEW, A PARASITE 


Since the Jew has never had a state based on territorial limits, and 
therefore never a culture of his own, the idea arose that here was a people 
who had to be considered as nomads.’ This is a great and dangerous error. 
The true nomad does actually possess a definite territory; but he merely 
doesn’t cultivate it, as the settled farmer does. He lives on the products of 
his herds, with which he wanders over his domain. The natural reason for 
this mode of existence can be found in the infertility of the soil, which 
doesn’t allow permanent settlement. 


5 This complaint is ancient. For centuries, observers have remarked on the 
inability of Jews to create their own culture or civilization. As far back as circa 
75 AD, Apollonius Molon wrote that the Jews “are the only people who have 
contributed no useful invention to civilization”; for details, see Dalton (2011). 
6 Goethe’s Faust, line 1336. 


7 What we would today call ‘nomadic hunter-gatherers..’ 


305 


MEIN KAMPF 


The deeper cause, though, lies in the fact that there is no technical 
culture at hand to make up for the natural poverty of the living space. There 
are territories where even the Aryan can establish fixed settlements only 
by means of his technology, developed over the course of more than a 
thousand years. Otherwise these territories would have to be abandoned, 
unless the Aryan were willing to wander about in nomadic fashion. But his 
technical tradition and his age-long experience in the use of technical means 
would probably make the nomadic life unbearable for him. 

We should remember that, during the first period of American 
colonization, numerous Aryans earned their daily livelihood as trappers, 
hunters, etc., frequently wandering about in large groups with their women 
and children, very much like nomads. But as soon as their growing numbers 
and improved tools allowed the land to be cleared, and natives driven out, 
their established settlements rapidly grew. 

The Aryan himself was probably at first a nomad, becoming a settler 
only in the course of ages. And therefore he was never a Jew! No, the Jew 
is not a nomad; the nomad already has a definite attitude towards the 
concept of ‘work,’ and this served as the basis of later cultural development, 
when the necessary intellectual conditions were at hand. There’s a certain 
amount of idealism in the nomad, even though of a rather primitive kind. 
His whole character, therefore, may seem odd to the Aryan, but he will 
never be unsympathetic to it. The Jew, however, hasn’t the slightest trace 
of idealism. He has never been a nomad, but always a parasite in the body 
of other peoples. If he occasionally abandoned regions where he had 
previously lived, he didn’t do so voluntarily. He did it because, from time 
to time, he was driven out by those whom he had abused.® Jewish self- 
expansion is a typical parasitic phenomenon; he always seeks new feeding 
ground for his race. 

But this has nothing to do with nomadism, because the Jew never 
thinks of leaving a territory that he has once occupied. He firmly stays 
where he is, with such tenacity that he can hardly be driven out, even by 
force. He expands into new territories only when certain conditions for his 
existence appear; but without them—unlike the nomad—he would never 
change his residence. He is and remains an eternal parasite, a sponger who, 
like a pernicious bacillus, spreads over wider and wider areas as they 
become favorable to him. The effect produced by his presence is also like 
8 For millennia, Jews have been driven out by their host populations. The Nazi 
expulsion of Jews was only the latest in a long history of such actions, reaching 
back at least to the ancient Egyptians. 


306 


CHAPTER 11 


that of a sponger; wherever he establishes himself, the host people die out, 
sooner or later. 


11.12 JEWISH ‘RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY’ 


Thus the Jew has, at all times, lived in states belonging to other people, 
and there he has formed his own state. It remains hidden behind the mask 
of ‘religious community,’ as long as external circumstances make it 
inadvisable to reveal its true nature. But as soon as he feels strong enough 
to do without a disguise, he lifts the mask and suddenly becomes that which 
many others didn’t wish to believe or see: the Jew. 

The Jew’s life as a parasite thriving on the body of other nations and 
states explains a characteristic that caused Schopenhauer to describe the 
Jew as “the great master of lies.”® Existence compels the Jew to lie, and to 
lie systematically—just as it compels the inhabitants of northern climates 
to wear warm clothes. 

He can live among other peoples only as long as he succeeds in 
persuading them that he is not a people but a ‘religious community’— 
though of a special sort. 

This is but his first great lie. 

In order to continue his existence as a parasite of other peoples, he is 
obliged to conceal his inner nature. The greater the intelligence of the 
individual Jew, the better will he succeed in deceiving others. It may go so far 
that his host people will actually believe that the Jew really is a Frenchman or 
Englishman, a German or Italian, who happens to belong to a special religious 
faith. State authorities in particular, who generally have only a minimal 
historical sense, fall victim to his notorious deception. In these circles, 
independent thinking is considered a sin against the sacred rules by which 
official promotion takes place. It’s therefore unsurprising that even today, in 
the Bavarian government offices, for example, there isn’t the slightest 
suspicion that the Jews form a peopleand not a ‘religion.’ One glance, though, 
at the Jewish press should provide sufficient proof for even those of the most 
modest intelligence. The Jewish Echo, however, is not an official gazette and 
therefore not authoritative in the eyes of those government potentates. 


° See Chapter 10.4, note 3. 
307 


MEIN KAMPF 


11.13 JEWISH RELIGIOUS DOCTRINE 


Jewry has always been a nation of a definite racial character, and never 
a religion. Early on, and driven by a desire to get ahead, they began to seek 
for a means that would distract from any inconvenient attention. What 
could be more effective, and at the same time more above suspicion, than 
the idea of a religious community? Here, too, everything is copied, or rather 
stolen—the Jew could not possess any religious institution that developed 
from his own nature, seeing that he lacks any kind of idealism. As well, 
any belief in the afterlife is foreign to him.'? To the Aryan mind, religion is 
unimaginable unless it embodies the conviction that life somehow survives 
after death. As a matter of fact, the Talmud is not a book that prepares one 
for the afterlife; it only supplies rules for a practical and profitable life in 
this world. 

Jewish religious doctrine is principally a collection of instructions for 
maintaining the blood purity of Jewry, and for regulating intercourse 
between Jews, themselves, and the rest of the world—which is to say, their 
relation with non-Jews. But this teaching isn’t concerned with moral 
problems. Rather, it’s concerned with petty economic problems. 

Of the moral value of Jewish religious teaching, there are, and have 
always been, exhaustive studies (not by Jews; Jewish drivel on this subject 
is always self-serving) that show this kind of religion to be utterly 
monstrous, from the Aryan perspective. The Jew himself is the best 
example of the product of this religious training. His life is only of this 
world, and his mentality is as foreign to the true spirit of Christianity as 
his character was to the great Founder of this new creed, 2,000 years ago.!! 
The Founder made no secret of his estimation of the Jewish people. When 
necessary, he drove those enemies of the human race out of the temple of 
God; then, as always, they used religion as a means of advancing their 
commercial interests. In return, Christ was nailed to the cross. Our modern 
Christians, on the other hand, enter into party politics and, when elections 
are being held, they debase themselves to beg for Jewish votes. They even 
'0 The Old Testament—that is, the Jewish Bible—is almost completely lacking 
in reference to an immortal soul, an afterlife, heaven and hell, etc. The focus is 
strictly on the present physical, material realm. This is partly why material 
concerns—money, material goods, sensual pleasure, power, etc—weigh so 
heavily within Judaism. 


"| Hitler seems unaware that Jesus, Mary, Joseph, and all 12 Apostles were Jews. 
For a detailed analysis of the relationship between Judaism and early 
Christianity, from Nietzsche’s perspective, see Dalton (2010, 201 1c). 

308 


CHAPTER 11 


enter into political swindles with the atheistic Jewish parties, against the 
interests of their own nation. 

On this first and greatest lie—that Jewry is not a race but a religion— 
other subsequent lies are based. One of these relates to the language of the 
Jew. For him, language is not a means for expressing his inner thoughts 
but rather a means of concealing them. When he speaks French, he thinks 
Jewish; and when writing German verses, he only gives expression to the 
character of his own nationality. 

As long as the Jew has not succeeded in mastering other peoples, he’s 
forced to speak their language—whether he likes it or not. But as soon as 
they become his slaves, they would have to learn another language 
(Esperanto, for example!), so that by this means Jewry could more easily 
dominate them! 


11.14 THE ‘ELDERS OF ZION’ 


How much the whole existence of this people is based on a permanent 
lie is proved in a unique way by The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, so 
infinitely hated by the Jews.'? With groans and moans, the Frankfurter 


2 The Protocols are a series of 24 short essays purporting to describe Jewish 
plans for world domination. Of uncertain origin, they emerged in Russia in the 
early 1900s, and were “exposed” as a hoax in 1921. From Hitler’s standpoint, 
however, it’s irrelevant who wrote it; what matters is whether it is a true account 
of the activities of international Jewry. 

Copies are widely available on the Internet—for example, at 
www.radioislam.org and www.jewwatch.com. Radio Islam includes this brief 
and fairly accurate synopsis: 

“Goyim are mentally inferior to Jews and can’t run their nations 
properly. For their sake and ours, we need to abolish their governments and 
replace them with a single government. This will take a long time and involve 
much bloodshed, but it’s for a good cause. Here’s what we’ll need to do: 
¢ Place our agents and helpers everywhere. 
¢ Take control of the media and use it in propaganda for our plans. 
¢ Start fights between different races, classes, and religions. 

* Use bribery, threats, and blackmail to get our way. 

¢ Use Freemasonic Lodges to attract potential public officials. 

¢ Appeal to successful peoples’ egos. 

¢ Appoint puppet leaders who can be controlled by blackmail. 

¢ Replace royal rule with socialist rule, then communism, then despotism. 


309 


MEIN KAMPF 


Zeitung repeats again and again that these are forgeries: the best proof of 
their authenticity. Here, what many Jews unconsciously wish to do is 
clearly set forth, and that’s what counts. It doesn’t matter from what Jewish 
brain these revelations sprang; the important thing is that they disclose, 
with an almost terrifying precision, the nature and activity of the Jewish 
people, exposing both their inner contexts and final aims. 

The best way of judging them, however, is reality. If historical 
developments of the last few centuries are studied in light of this book, we 
will immediately understand the constant outcry of the Jewish press. The 
moment that the general public gets hold of this book, the Jewish danger 
will be stamped out. 


11.15 THE WAY OF JEWRY 


In order to properly know the Jew, it’s necessary to study the road that 
he has followed among other peoples during the last few centuries. One 
example will suffice to give clear insight here. Since his way has been the 
same for all epochs—just as that of the people degraded by him has 
remained the same—it will be best, for present purposes, to mark his 


* Abolish all rights and freedoms, except the right of force by us. 
* Sacrifice people (including Jews sometimes) when necessary. 

¢ Eliminate religion; replace it with science and materialism. 

* Control the education system to spread deception and destroy intellect. 
¢ Rewrite history to our benefit. 

* Create entertaining distractions. 

¢ Corrupt minds with filth and perversion. 

¢ Encourage people to spy on one another. 

¢ Keep the masses in poverty and perpetual labor. 

* Take possession of all wealth, property, and (especially) gold. 

* Use gold to manipulate the markets, cause depressions, etc. 

¢ Introduce a progressive tax on wealth. 

¢ Replace sound investment with speculation. 

* Make long-term interest-bearing loans to governments. 

* Give bad advice to governments and everyone else. 

Eventually the Goyim will be so angry with their governments that they’l] 
gladly have us take over. We will then appoint a descendant of David to be king 
of the world, and the remaining Goyim will bow down and sing his 
praises. Everyone will live in peace and obedient order under his glorious rule.” 
Even this brief summary demonstrates the relevancy of the document. 


310 


CHAPTER 11 


development by stages. For the sake of simplicity, I will indicate these 
stages by letters of the alphabet." 

The first Jews came into ancient Germany during the time of the 
Roman invasion; as usual, they came as merchants. During the turmoil 
caused by subsequent great migrations, the Jews seem to have disappeared. 
The period of the first Germanic state formation may be seen as the 
beginning of a process whereby Central and Northern Europe was again, 
and this time permanently, Judaized. A development began that has always 
been the same, or similar, wherever Jews came into contact with Aryan 
peoples. 

(a) As soon as the first permanent settlements were established, the Jew 
was suddenly ‘there.’ He arrived as a merchant, and in the beginning didn’t 
bother to disguise his nationality. He still remained openly a Jew, partly 
because of the large racial difference between himself and his host people, 
partly because he knew too little of the language, and partly because the 
social cohesion of the host people was too strong; he couldn’t appear as 
anything other than a foreign merchant. His cunning, combined with 
inexperience on the part of the host people, meant that it was no 
disadvantage to openly retain his Jewish character. Rather, it would have 
been an advantage; the foreigner was often well-received. 

(b) Slowly but steadily, he began to take part in economic life—not as 
a producer, but only as a middleman. His commercial cunning, acquired 
over thousands of years of negotiation as an intermediary, made him 
superior to the Aryans, who were still quite helpless and boundlessly 
honest. After a short time, commerce threatened to become a Jewish 
monopoly. 

He began to lend money at usurious interest. It was he who first 
introduced the payment of interest.'* The danger of this innovation was not 


'3 The remainder of this chapter is organized around 12 distinct points, 
designated ‘a’ through ‘1’. 

'4 Indeed, “the earliest roots of the concept [of usury] are found in the Old 
Testament and [later] in Aristotle” (Taeusch 1942: 291). And as Houkes (2004: 
15) points out, Jews were prohibited from loaning at interest only to their fellow 
Jews, and not to strangers: “Lending to foreigners not only was permissible, but 
it was regarded a blessing of God.” This is explicit in the Jewish Bible: “Thou 
shalt not lend upon usury to thy [Jewish] brother... To a foreigner you may lend 
upon usury, but to your brother you shall not lend upon usury” (Deut 23:19). 
And God indeed promised to the Jews that usury would lead to power over 
nations; “For the Lord your God will bless you, as he promised you, and you 


311 


MEIN KAMPF 


initially recognized; rather, it was welcomed, because it offered momentary 
advantages. 

(c) At this stage, the Jew became firmly settled. He inhabited special 
quarters of the cities and towns, gradually coming to form a State within a 
State. He regarded the commercial domain and all financial transactions 
as his own exclusive privilege, which he ruthlessly exploited. 

(d) Finance and trade became his complete monopoly. His usurious interest 
rates finally aroused opposition; his impudence gave rise to indignation; his 
wealth, to envy. His cup ran over when he included land among his commercial 
objects, and degraded it to the level of a commodity to be sold, or rather traded. 
Since he himself never cultivated the soil but considered it only as an object to 
be exploited—something on which the peasant could still live, but only by 
submitting to the miserable extortions of his new master—public antipathy 
grew into open hatred. His blood-sucking tyranny became so unbearable that 
excessive actions were taken against him. People began to scrutinize this 
foreigner more closely, discovering more and more repulsive traits and 
characteristics in him, until the cleft became unbridgeable.'* 

In times of distress, a wave of public anger has usually arisen against 
him, and the plundered and ruined masses began to defend themselves 
against what they considered to be a scourge of God. They came to know 
him though the course of centuries, eventually viewing his mere existence 
as something comparable to the plague. 

(e) Now the Jew begins to reveal his true character. He pays court to 
govemments with servile flattery, using his money to ingratiate himself 
further and thus securing the privilege of exploiting his victims. Although 
public wrath occasionally flares up against this eternal blood-sucker, 
driving him out, after a few years he reappears in those same places and 
carries on.as before. No persecution can force him to give up this type of 
human exploitation, and none can drive him away; he always returns after 
a short time, and it’s the same old story. 

In an effort to at least prevent the worst from happening, people begin 


shall lend to many nations, but you shall not borrow; and you shall rule over 
many nations, but they shall not rule over you” (Deut 15:6). 

'5 See Chapter 4.12, note 10. 

‘6 Compare to this observation by the ancient Greek writer Philostratus: “The 
Jews have long been in revolt not only against the Romans, but against all 
humanity... [They] are separated from ourselves by a greater gulf than divides 
us from Susa or Bactra or the more distant Indies” (Life of Apollonius, V.33.4). 
Notably, this was written circa 225 AD. For details, see Dalton (2011). 


312 


CHAPTER 11 


to withdraw the land from his usurious hands by making it illegal for him 
to own land. 

(f) As the power of kings and princes grows, so in proportion does he 
cozy up to them. He begs for ‘charters’ and ‘privileges,’ which those 
gentlemen, who are generally in financial difficulty, gladly supply in retum 
for suitable payment. However high a price he has to pay, he succeeds in 
getting it back within a few years from interest and compound interest. He 
is a true blood-sucker who clings to the body of his unfortunate victims 
and cannot be removed; and when the princes find themselves again in 
need, they draw from his blood with their own hands. 

This game is repeated unendingly. And the role of the so-called 
“German princes’ is nearly as bad as that of the Jews themselves. This 
royalty is God’s punishment for their people. The only equivalent can be 
found in some of the goverment ministers of our present time. 

It was due to the German princes that the German nation couldn’t succeed 
in permanently freeing itself from the Jewish danger. Unfortunately nothing 
changed as time went on. All that the princes received from the Jews was their 
thousand-fold reward for the sins committed by them against their own people. 
They made a pact with the devil and found themselves in his embrace.!’ 

(g) His ensnaring of the princes leads to their downfall. Slowly but surely, 
their standing among the people declines as they not only overlook the public 
interest but actually exploit them. The Jew knows very well how it will end 
for them, and works to hasten it. He increases their financial hardship by 
hindering their effective duty toward their people, by slithering around them 
with servile flattery, and by encouraging their vices—thus making himself 
all the more indispensible. His astuteness, or rather his unscrupulousness, in 
financial affairs allows him to squeeze new income from the princes, to grind 
the money out of them, and then to quickly spend it. 

Thus every court has its ‘court Jews,’ as these monsters are called, who 
torture their innocent victims until they’re driven to despair, while at the 
same time preparing eternal pleasures for the princes. Who, then, can be 
surprised that these ornaments of the human race received official honors, 
and were even admitted into the hereditary nobility, not only making that 
institution ridiculous but serving to poison it? Now, he can naturally exploit 
his position for his own advancement. 

Finally he needs only to become baptized to possess all the rights and 


" The parallels to modern-day American politicians, dominated as they are by 
AIPAC and the money of the American Jewish Lobby, are striking. 


313 


MEIN KAMPF 


privileges of the native peoples. Not rarely does he avail himself of this 
business—to the great joy of the Church, having won over a new son, and 
also to the joy of Israel, which rejoices at pulling off such a swindle. 

(h) A change now begins to take place within Jewry. Until now they 
have been Jews; that is, they hadn’t previously put much value on 
pretending to be something else. And in any case, they couldn’t easily 
overcome the distinctive racial characteristics that separated them from 
others. Even as late as the time of Frederick the Great, ® no one looked 
upon the Jews as other than a ‘foreign’ people, and Goethe revolted at the 
thought that marriage between Christians and Jews might no longer be 
prohibited. And Goethe, by God, was certainly no reactionary or zealot; 
his words came from the voice of the blood and of reason. Notwithstanding 
the disgraceful happenings in court circles, the people instinctively 
recognized that the Jew was a foreign body in their own flesh, and they 
took the corresponding attitude toward him. 

But all this was now to change. In the course of more than a thousand 
years, he has learned to master the host language so thoroughly that he can 
now downplay his Jewishness and place his ‘Germanism’ in the 
foreground. Though it seems ridiculous, or even absurd, he is impudent 
enough to call himself a ‘Teuton,’ which in this case means ‘German.’ With 
this he begins one of the most infamous deceptions imaginable. He doesn’t 
possess the slightest bit of Germanism; he only has acquired the art of 
twisting the German language—and in the most disgusting way—to his 
own uses. Apart from this, he never mixes with the German character; his 
whole Germanism rests on language alone. 

Race, however, doesn’t lie in language, but only in the blood. No one 
knows this better than the Jew, seeing that he attaches so little importance 
to the preservation of his own language, while at the same time strives to 
maintain the purity of his own blood. A man may change his language 
without much trouble; but it’s only his old ideas that he expresses in the 
new language. His inner nature is not thereby changed. 

The Jew himself is the best proof of this; he can speak a thousand 
languages and yet he remains a Jew. His distinguishing characteristics are 
the same when he spoke Latin at Ostia 2,000 years ago as a grain merchant, 

. as they are today when he profits from grain-selling with his garbled 
German. He’s always the same Jew. And it’s self-evident that this obvious 
fact goes unrecognized by the typical ministerial secretary or police official; 


'8 That is, circa the 1780s. 


314 


CHAPTER 11 


there is scarcely anyone with less instinct or intelligence than these civil 
servants of our modern German state authority. 

The reason why the Jew suddenly decides to transform himself into a 
‘German’ is obvious. He senses that royal power is slowly crumbling, and 
he therefore looks around to find a new platform on which to stand. 
Furthermore, his financial domination over all spheres of economic life has 
become so powerful that he can no longer sustain or expand that enormous 
structure unless he earns full ‘civil rights.’ He desires both preservation and 
expansion; the higher he climbs, the more alluring becomes the prospect 
of reaching that ancient goal, promised to him long ago: the dream of world 
domination. He now anticipates this with feverish eyes. Therefore all his 
efforts are now directed toward full possession of ‘civil rights.’!° 

This was the reason for his emancipation from the ghetto. 

(i) And thus the Court Jew slowly develops into the national Jew. But 
naturally he still remains associated with the upper circles, and he even 
attempts to push his way in even further. But at the same time, others of 
his race curry favor with the beloved public. If we remember the crimes he 
has committed against the masses over the centuries, how repeatedly and 
ruthlessly he has exploited them, how he sucked out their very blood; and 
further, when we remember how they gradually came to hate him, and 
finally considered him as a punishment from the heavens—then we can 
well understand how difficult the Jew must have found this final 
transformation. Yes, it must be an arduous task to present themselves as 
‘friends of humanity’ to their flayed victims. 

He therefore begins by making amends for his previous sins. He begins 
his career as a ‘benefactor’ of humanity. Since his new philanthropy has a 
very concrete aim in view, he cannot very well apply to himself the biblical 
recommendation, not to allow the left hand to know what the right hand is 
giving.”° No, he is obliged to let as many people as possible know how 
deeply the sufferings of the masses have grieved him, and to what a degree 
of personal sacrifice he is ready to make in order to help them—whether 
he likes it or not. 

With this innate ‘modesty,’ he trumpets his virtues before the world, 
until finally people actually begin to believe him. Anyone who doubts him 


' Jews began to gain civil rights in Germany in 1812, with partial political 
emancipation in Prussia. Rights for all German Jews came in 1870, upon 
German unification. 


20 Matthew (6:3). 
315 


MEIN KAMPF 


is considered unjust. Thus after a little while, he begins to twist things 
around, so as to make it appear that it was he who suffered the injustices, 
and not vice versa. The particularly stupid ones believe him, and they can’t 
help but pity ‘the unfortunate.’ 

A remarkable fact is that, despite his proclaimed readiness to make 
personal sacrifices, the Jew never becomes impoverished. He knows how 
to make ends meet. Occasionally his benevolence might be compared to 
manure; it isn’t spread around merely for love of the field, but rather with 
a view to future produce. Anyhow, after a comparatively short period of 
time, the Jew has come to be known as a ‘benefactor and friend to 
mankind.’ What an amazing transformation! 

That which is more or less natural for others thus becomes an object 
of astonishment, and even admiration. That’s why he receives more credit 
for his acts of benevolence than the rest of humanity. 

And even more: The Jew becomes a liberal all at once, and beeing to 
talk enthusiastically of the necessity of human progress. 

Gradually he becomes the spokesman of a new age. 

Yet at the same time he continues to destroy the foundations of that 
part of the economy that might truly benefit people. Through the purchase 
of stock, he pushes his influence into the circuit of national production, 
turning it into an object of trade, and thus ruining the basis on which 
personal ownership alone is possible. There then arises a feeling of 
estrangement between worker and employer, which eventually leads to 
political class struggle. 

Finally, Jewish influence on all economic activities increases with a 
terrible speed via the stock exchange. He becomes the owner, or at least 
the controller, of the national labor force. 

In order to strengthen his political position, he seeks to remove the 
racial and civil barriers that had previously hindered his advance. With a 
characteristic tenacity, he champions the cause of religious tolerance for 
this purpose. And in Freemasonry, which has completely fallen into his 
hands, he finds a magnificent weapon to achieve his ends.”) Govemment 
circles, as well as the higher circles of the political and commercial 


21 The Freemasons were originally a guild of stone workers that was established 
in the 15th century. Because of its influence in medieval society, it expanded to 
become a private club of local or regional civic leaders. Over time it became 
known as a ‘secret society’ composed of powerful and hidden rulers of 
government. As Jews became wealthier and more influential in European 
society, they sought membership, and thus Freemasonry gradually became 
associated with Jewish power. 

316 


CHAPTER 11 


bourgeoisie, fall prey to his net of Masonic strings, though they themselves 
never suspect what is happening. 

Only the people as such, or rather the masses who were just becoming 
conscious of their own power and were beginning to use it to fight for 
their rights and liberties, had escaped his grasp. But this influence is more 
necessary than anything else. The Jew realized that, in his efforts to attain 
a dominant public role, he would need a ‘pace-maker.’ And he thought 
he could find this in broad sections of the bourgeoisie. But the 
Freemasons failed to catch the glove-makers and linen-weavers in their 
fragile nets. It thus became necessary to find a coarser and more effective 
means. 

Thus Freemasonry became joined with a second weapon in the service 
of Jewry: the press. The Jew exercises all his skill and tenacity in getting 
hold of it. By means of the press, he gradually begins to control the whole 
of public life. He drives it along a road that he has chosen to reach his own 
ends; he is now in a position to create and direct that force which, under 
the name of ‘public opinion,’ is better known today than it was a few 
decades ago. 

In this, he gives himself the air of thirsting after knowledge. He praises 
every step of progress, particularly those phases that lead to the ruin of 
others. He judges all progress and development from the standpoint of his 
own advantage. And when it brings him no such advantage, he is the mortal 
enemy of enlightenment; he hates all true culture. He uses all the 
knowledge acquired in the schools of others exclusively in the service of 
his own race. 

He guards his nationality more than ever. Though overflowing with 
‘enlightenment,’ ‘progress,’ ‘liberty,’ ‘humanity,’ etc., his first concern is 
to preserve his own racial integrity. He occasionally bestows one of his 
women on an influential Christian; but the racial stock of his male 
descendants is always pure. He poisons the blood of others, but preserves 
his own. The Jew rarely marries a Christian girl, but the Christian marries 
a Jewess.?? The resulting mongrels always fall on the Jewish side. Thus a 
part of the higher nobility becomes completely degenerate. The Jew is well 
aware of this fact, and thereby systematically ‘disarms’ the intellectual 
leaders of his racial adversaries. To mask his tactics and fool his victims, 


22 Orthodox Judaism is matrilinial; that is, a Jewish woman bears Jewish 
children, even if the father is non-Jewish. From a biological perspective, of 
course, a child of mixed parentage is half of each. But in Hitler’s view, the 
Jewish (lower) half always prevails. 


317 


MEIN KAMPF 


he speaks of the equality of all men, no matter their race or color.?? And 
the fools begin to believe him. 

Since his whole nature still has too foreign an odor for the broad masses 
to allow themselves to be caught in his nets, he uses the press to construct 
a picture of himself that is entirely untrue but well-designed to serve his 
purpose. In the comic papers, special efforts are made to represent the Jews 
as a harmless little people that, like all others, has its peculiarities. Despite 
their manners, which may seem a bit strange, the comics present them as 
fundamentally honest and benevolent souls. Attempts are generally made 
to make them appear more insignificant than dangerous. 

During this phase of his progress, the chief goal of the Jew is the 
victory of democracy, or rather: rule of the parliamentary system. This is 
most compatible with his purposes; the personal element is excluded—and 
in its place we have the stupidity of the majority, incompetence, and last 
but not least, cowardice. 

The final result must necessarily be the overthrow of the monarchy, 
which has to happen sooner or later. 


11.16 STANDING OF THE FACTORY WORKER 


(j) A tremendous economic development transforms the social structure 
of a nation. The small artisan class slowly disappears and the factory 
worker, who took its place, has scarcely any chance of establishing an 
independent existence of his own; he sinks more and more to the level of 
a proletariat. An essential characteristic of the industrial ‘factory worker’ 
is that he is scarcely ever able to support himself, now or later in life. He 
becomes propertyless, in the truest sense of the word. His old age is 
miserable and can hardly be called life at all. 

In earlier times, a similar situation was created that demanded a 
solution; and one was found. Together with the peasant and the artisan, a 
new class was gradually formed, along with officials and salaried 
workers—especially from the state. All of them were propertyless, in the 
truest sense of the word. But the state found a remedy for this unhealthy 
situation by providing an old-age pension for its officials. Private 
enterprises slowly followed this example in increasing numbers, so that 





23 Though it is hard to believe today, there is a long philosophical and 
sociological legacy on behalf of the inequality of men. Thinkers as diverse as 
Plato, Aristotle, Gobineau, and Nietzsche held such a view. 


318 


CHAPTER 11 


today every regular non-manual worker receives a pension in his later 
years, provided that the firm in which he works surpasses a certain size. 
Only by caring for the state official in old age could they develop a high 
degree of unselfish devotion to duty; in pre-war times, this was one of the 
distinguishing characteristics of German officials. 

Thus an entire propertyless class was saved from destitution, and found 
a place in the social structure of the national community. 

The question is once again put before the state and nation, but this time 
in a much larger form. More and more, millions of people left the countryside 
and the villages to take up employment in the big city factories. The working 
and living conditions of this new class were worse than miserable. The more 
or less mechanical transformation of prior methods of artisian and peasant 
work didn’t fit well. The way that the peasants and artisans formerly worked 
had nothing comparable to the intensive labor of the new factory worker. In 
the old trades, time did not play an important role, but it became an essential 
element in the new industrial system. The formal transfer of the old working 
hours into the large-scale industrial enterprises had fatal results. The actual 
amount of work previously accomplished within a certain time was 
comparatively small, because the modern methods of intensive production 
were then unknown. Therefore, though in the older system a working day of 
14 or even 15 hours was bearable, now it was beyond the limits of human 
endurance because every minute was utilized to the extreme. 

This absurd transfer of the old working hours to the new industrial 
system proved unfortunate in two respects: it ruined the workers’ health, 
and it destroyed their faith in a higher law of justice. To this was finally 
added, on the one hand, miserable wages; and on the other side, the 
employer held a much more lucrative position than before. 

In the country, there could be no social problem because the master 
and the farmhand were doing the same kind of work, and even ate out of 
the same dish. But this, too, changed. 

The division between employer and employees seems now to have 
extended to all branches of life. How far this Judaizing process of our 
people has been allowed to extend is illustrated by the low standing, if not 
contempt, of the manual worker. This isn’t German. It’s due to the 
introduction of a foreign element into our lives—in truth, a Judaizing 
process. One effect has been to transform the old respect for manual work 
into a definite feeling of contempt for all physical labor. 

Thus a new social class has grown up, one that stands in low esteem. 
The day must come when we will have to face the question of whether the 


319 


MEIN KAMPF 


nation will be able to make this class an integral part of the social 
community, or whether the difference of status will become a permanent 
gulf separating this class from the others. 

One thing, however, is certain: This class doesn’t include the worst 
elements in its ranks, but rather the most energetic. The sophistication of 
so-called culture hasn’t yet exercised its disintegrating and degenerating 
influence. The broad masses of this new lower class haven’t yet been 
infected with the poison of pacifist weakness. They are still robust and can 
be, if necessary, even brutal. 

While our bourgeoisie pay no attention at all to this question, and 
indifferently allow events to take their course, the Jew seizes upon the many 
possibilities for the future. While on the one hand he organizes capitalistic 
methods of exploitation to their ultimate degree, he curries favor with the 
victims of his policy and power, and in a short while becomes the leader of 
their struggle against himself. ‘Against himself’ is here only figuratively 
speaking; for this Great Master of Lies knows how to appear in the guise 
of the innocent, and throw the guilt on others.”* Since he has the impudence 
to lead the masses, they never for a moment suspect that they are falling 
prey to one of the most infamous betrayals of all time. 

And yet that’s what it was. 


11.17 JEWISH TACTICS 


The moment this new class arises from the general economic situation, 
the Jew clearly sees where to find the necessary pacemaker for his own 
progressive march. First he uses the bourgeoisie as a battering-ram against 
the feudal order; and then the worker against the bourgeois world. Just as 
he succeeded in obtaining civil rights in the protection of the bourgeois 
class, he now hopes to use the workers’ struggle for existence as his path 
to obtain full control over them. 


24 The idea that Jews cast themselves as innocents to hide their danger was 
already recognized by Nietzsche: “People of the basest origin, in part rabble, 
outcasts not only from good but also from respectable society, raised away from 
even the smell of culture, without discipline, without knowledge, without the 
remotest suspicion that there is such a thing as conscience in spiritual matters; 
simply—Jews: with an instinctive ability to create an advantage, a means of 
seduction out of every superstitious supposition... When Jews step forward as 
innocence itself, then the danger is great.” (Will to Power, sec. 199.) 


320 


CHAPTER 11 


From that point on, the workers’ only task is to fight for the future of 
the Jewish people. Without knowing it, the worker places himself at the 
service of the very power against which he believes he is fighting. The 
worker thinks he’s fighting against capital, and thus is all the more easily 
brought to fight for capitalist interests. Outcries are raised against 
international capital, but in reality such actions are directed against the 
structure of national economics, in the hope that the international stock 
exchange can triumph over its dead body. 

The Jew’s procedure is as follows: 

He approaches the worker, hypocritically pretending to feel pity for 
him and his lot of misery and poverty, thus gaining his confidence. He 
shows himself eager to study the workers’ various hardships—and strives 
to awaken a yearning to change the conditions under which they live. He 
artfully encourages the desire for social justice, which is a typical Aryan 
characteristic, and this is then transformed into a hatred of the more 
fortunate ones. Next he turns the struggle for the elimination of social ills 
into a precise worldview. And thus he establishes the Marxist doctrine. 


11.18 CORE OF THE MARXIST WORLDVIEW 


By presenting his doctrine as a series of socially just demands, he 
propagates the doctrine all the more effectively. But he also provokes the 
opposition of decent people who refuse to admit these demands that seem 
fundamentally unjust and impossible to realize. Under this cloak of purely 
social ideas are hidden truly diabolic purposes, which are proclaimed with 
a boundless impudence. This doctrine is an inseparable mixture of reason 
and absurdity—but in such a way that only the absurdity can be realized, 
never the reason. 

By categorically repudiating the value of the individual and also the 
nation and its racial content, this doctrine destroys the fundamental basis 
of all culture; for culture depends on these very factors. Such is the true 
core of the Marxist worldview—insofar as the term ‘worldview’ can be 
applied at all to this phantom product of a criminal brain. The shattering of 
the concept of personality and of race removes the chief obstacle that barred 
the way to domination by society’s inferior element—and this is the Jew. 

The significance of this doctrine lies precisely in its economic and 
political absurdity. For this reason, intelligent people refuse to support it, 
while all those who are less intellectual, or who are poorly educated in 
economic principles, join it with flying colors. The intelligence behind the 


321 


MEIN KAMPF 


movement—for even this movement needs intelligence to exist—is ‘served 
up’ by the Jews themselves, from their own ranks. 

Thus arises a movement that’s composed exclusively of manual 
workers under Jewish leadership. By all appearances, this movement strives 
to improve the workers’ living conditions; but in reality its aim is the 
enslavement, and thereby the destruction, of all non-Jewish people. 

The Freemasons carried out a program of pacifistic paralysis of the 
instinct for national self-preservation among our so-called intelligentsia, 
which was then extended to the broad masses of the workers and 
bourgeoisie by means of the always-Jewish press. 

To these two instruments of disintegration, a third and still more 
ruthless one was added, namely, organized brute force. As a shock- and 
storm-troop, Marxism seeks to finish off those parts of the social order left 
standing, after the two former weapons do their work. 

The combined activity of all these forces has been wonderfully 
managed. And it won’t be surprising if we find that those institutions which 
have always presented themselves as the organs of the more or less 
traditional state authority should now fail. Among our high and highest 
state officials (with very few exceptions), the Jew has always found the 
most complacent backers of his destructive work. An attitude of cringing 
submissiveness towards ‘superiors,’ and a condescending arrogance 
towards ‘inferiors,’ are the characteristics of this class, along with a degree 
of narrow-mindedness that is truly frightening. All this is exceeded only 
by a towering and utterly amazing self-conceit. 

But these qualities are of greatest use to the Jew. Therefore they are 
the ones that he appreciates most. 


11.19 ORGANIZATION OF MARXIST WORLD-DOCTRINE 


The practical struggle, only now beginning, may be described as 
follows: 

Consistent with the ultimate goals of the Jewish struggle—goals that 
are not exhausted by economic domination of the world—the Jew divides 
the organization of his Marxist world-doctrine into two parts. Though 
apparently distinct, these parts in truth form an indivisible unity: the 
political movement and the trade union movement. 

The trade union movement gathers recruits. It offers assistance and 
protection to the workers in the hard struggle they must wage for the bare 


322 


CHAPTER 11 


means of existence—a struggle that’s due to the greediness and narrow- 
mindedness of many of the employers. Unless the workers are ready to 
surrender all claims to their vital human rights, and unless they are ready 
to submit to those who are irresponsible and heartless, then the worker must 
necessarily take matters into his own hands. The organized national 
community—that is to say, the state—pays no attention to his needs. 

The so-called national bourgeoisie, blinded by its own financial 
interests, opposes this life-or-death struggle of the workers, and places the 
heaviest obstacles in their way. Not only do they hinder all efforts at 
shortening the inhumanly long work hours, prohibiting child-labor, granting 
security and protection to women, and improving the hygienic conditions 
of the workshops and the dwellings of the working-class, but they actually 
sabotage them. All the while, the clever Jew takes the cause of the 
oppressed into his own hands. He gradually becomes the leader of the trade 
union movement. This is an easy task for him, because he doesn’t genuinely 
intend to eliminate social evils; rather, his objective is to establish an 
economic stormtroop who will follow his commands and thereby destroy 
national economic independence. For while a sound social policy has to 
move between the two aims of securing public health and of safeguarding 
an independent national economy, the Jew gives no consideration to these 
goals at all. Rather, their elimination is his life’s goal. He desires, not the 
preservation, but rather the destruction of an independent national 
economy. 

Therefore, as leader of the union movement, he has no scruples about 
putting forth demands that not only exceed the declared purpose of the 
movement, but couldn’t be carried out without ruining the national 
economy. Furthermore, he has no interest in seeing a healthy and sturdy 
population develop; he would prefer a degenerate, unthinking herd that can 
more easily be subjugated. Because these are his final objectives, he can 
afford to propose the most senseless demands—demands that are 
unrealizeable, and that therefore couldn’t lead to any real change. At best, 
they can arouse a spirit of unrest among the masses. And that’s precisely 
his purpose—and not a real and honest improvement of social conditions. 

The leadership of Jewry will thus remain unquestioned, atleast until an 
enormous effort is undertaken to enlighten the masses, so that they can better 
understand the causes of their misery. Or until the state gets rid of the Jew 
and his work. As long as the masses remain as ill-informed as they actually 
are today, and as long as the state remains as indifferent to their lot as it now 
is, the masses will follow whatever leader makes them the most extravagant 


323 


MEIN KAMPF 


promises in economic matters. And the Jew is a master at this. His entire 
activities are unhampered by moral considerations of any kind. 

Naturally, then, it takes him only a short time to defeat all his 
competitors in this field and drive them from the scene. In accordance with 
his general brutality and rapacity, he teaches the union movement the most 
brutal use of physical violence. Those who, using their intelligence, are 
able to resist the Jewish lures are now broken by terror. The success of that 
kind of activity is enormous. 

By means of the union—which ought to be a blessing for the nation— 
the Jew shatters the foundation of the national economy. 

Parallel to this runs the political organization. 

It operates hand-in-hand with the union movement, inasmuch as the 
latter prepares the masses for political organization, and even forces them 
into it. This is also the source of the money that the political organization 
needs to keep its enormous apparatus in action. It is the organ of control 
for the political activity of its members, and recruits the masses at all big 
political demonstrations. In the end it ceases to struggle for economic 
interests, but places its chief weapon—the refusal to work, in the form of 
a general strike—at the disposal of a political idea. 

By means of a press whose contents are adapted to the intellectual 
horizon of the most ignorant readers, the political and trade union 
organizations obtain an instrument that prepares the lowest stratum for a 
campaign of ruthless action. Its purpose isn’t to lead people out of the 
swamp of baseness and to lift their minds up, but to cater to their lowest 
instincts. Among the lazy-minded and self-seeking sections of the masses, 
this kind of speculation turns out to be quite profitable. 

Above all, it’s this very press that carries on a fanatical campaign of 
slander, striving to tear down everything that might be considered as a 
support for national independence, and sabotaging all cultural values and 
the autonomy of the national economy along the way. 

Above all, it attacks all men of character who refuse to yield to Jewish 
efforts to dominate, or who appear dangerous to the Jews merely because 
of their superior ability. In order to be hated by the Jew, it isn’t necessary 
to openly combat him; it’s quite sufficient if one be considered capable of 
opposing the Jew at some point in the future, or of using his talents to 
enhance the power and position of a nation hostile to the Jew. 

His unfailing instinct readily sniffs out the inner spirit of all those he 
meets; and those who aren’t of a kindred spirit with him may be sure to 
earn his hostility. Since the Jew is not the attacked but the attacker himself, 


324 


CHAPTERI11 


he considers as enemies not only those who attack him but also those who 
resist him. He then uses dishonorable means to break such upright people, 
including lies and slander. 

He stops at nothing. His vileness is so appalling that one really cannot 
be surprised if, in the imagination of our people, the Jew is pictured as the 
personification of the devil and the symbol of all evil. 

The ignorance of the broad masses about the inner character of the Jew, 
and the lack of instinct and narrow-mindedness of our upper classes, make 
our people an easy victim of this Jewish campaign of lies. 

While the upper classes, with their innate cowardice, turn away from 
anyone whom the Jew attacks with lies and slander, the common people 
believe everything—either from ignorance or simple-mindedness. State 
authorities either wrap themselves in a robe of silence, or more frequently, 
they persecute the unjustly victimized ones in order to stop the campaign 
in the Jewish press. In the eyes of some official ass, such action appears to 
uphold the authority of the state and preserve public order. 

Slowly, fear of the Marxist weapon of Jewry descends like a nightmare 
on the mind and soul of innocent people. 

They begin to quiver before this fearful enemy, and thereby become 
his victims. 


11.20 PALESTINE AS ORGANIZATIONAL CENTER 


(k) Jewish domination in the state seems now so fully assured that not 
only can he afford to call himself a Jew again, but he even openly 
acknowledges his ideas on national and political questions. A part of his 
race avows itself quite openly as an alien people, but even here they lie. 
When the Zionists try to make the rest of the world believe that the new 
national consciousness of the Jews will be satisfied by the establishment 
of a Palestinian state,” the Jews thereby cleverly dupe the simple-minded 
goyim. They haven’t the slightest intention of building up a Jewish state in 
Palestine so as to live there. What they really want is a central organization 
for their international world-swindle, one with sovereign rights and 
freedom from outside control—in other words, a refuge for convicted low- 
lifes and a training ground for budding criminals. 


25 That is, Israel—which only came into being in 1948, and then illegally. 


325 


MEIN KAMPF 


As asign of their growing confidence and sense of security, a certain portion 
of them openly and impudently proclaim their Jewish race, while another part 
hypocritically pretends that they are still German, French, or English. 

Their blatant behavior in their relations with other people shows how 
close they see the approaching victory. 

The black-haired Jewish youth lies in wait for hours, satanically glaring 
at the unsuspecting girl whom he plans to seduce, adulterating her blood 
and stealing her from her own people. He uses every possible means to 
undermine the racial foundations of a subjugated people. In his systematic 
efforts to ruin girls and women, he strives to break down the last racial 
barriers for other peoples, even on a large scale. The Jews were and are 
responsible for bringing Negroes into the Rhineland, with the ultimate idea 
of bastardizing the hated white race, and thus lowering its cultural and 
political level so that he himself might dominate. 

A racially-pure people who are conscious of their blood can never be 
overcome by the Jew. In this world, he will only be the master over a 
bastardized people. 

That’s why he systematically tries to lower the racial quality of a people 
by a continuous poisoning of the individual. 


11.21 DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT 


In the field of politics, he now begins to replace the idea of democracy 
with a dictatorship of the proletariat. 

In the organized mass of Marxism he has found a weapon that makes 
it possible for him to discard democracy, so as to subjugate and rule in a 
dictatorial fashion by the aid of brute force. 

He systematically works to bring about this revolution in two ways: 
economically and politically. 

Aided by international influences, he forms a ring of enemies around 
those nations that have proven too sturdy for him to attack from within. He 
incites them to war, and if necessary, plants the flag of revolution amidst 
the battlefield. 

Economically he undermines the state, until social programs become 
so unprofitable that they are taken from the state and turned over to his 
financial control. 

Politically he works to withdraw the means of subsistence from the 
state, undermines the foundations of national resistance and defense, 


326 


CHAPTER11 


destroys confidence in leadership, reviles the past and its history, and drags 
everything truly great down into the gutter. 

Culturally he contaminates art, literature, and the theater, scorns 
national sentiment, overturns all concepts of the sublime and beautiful, the 
worthy and the good, and ultimately drags the people down to the level of 
his own base nature. 

Religion is mocked, and ethics and morality are portrayed as antiquated 
prejudices; until the last pillars have fallen, on which the national being 
depends, in its struggle for existence in this world. 


11.22 FROM NATIONAL JEWS TO RACIAL JEWS 


(1) Now begins the last great revolution. As soon as the Jew gains 
political power, he drops the last few veils. Out of the democratic national 
Jew arises the blood-Jew, the tyrant of the peoples. In the course of a few 
years, he tries to root out all those who represent the national intelligence. 
By thus depriving the people of their natural intellectual leaders, he makes 
them ripe for a slave’s lot of permanent subjugation. 

Russia offers the most terrible example of such slavery, where he killed 
or starved 30 million people in a bout of savage fanaticism, and partly by 
means of inhuman torture.”° He did this so that a gang of Jewish journalists 
and stock exchange bandits could dominate a great people. 

The final result is not merely the loss of freedom of people oppressed 
by the Jews, but also the end of this parasite of nations. The death of the 
victim is followed, sooner or later, by that of the vampire. 


11.23 BASTARDIZED PEOPLE 


If we review all the causes of the German collapse, we find that the 
most profound and decisive cause remains the failure to recognize the racial 
problem, and especially the Jewish danger. 


6 The total number of people killed by the Bolsheviks and Stalin is hard to 
estimate, but Hitler’s figure is surely within reason. Russian scholars have long 
discussed a figure of 20 million, but that is almost certainly an underestimate. If 
we count deaths into the late Soviet period, some researchers have identified an 
overall toll of 50 to 60 million—an astounding figure that is rarely discussed in 
the West. It’s an open question how many had died by 1925, when Mein Kampf 
was initially published. 


327 


MEIN KAMPF 


It would have been easy enough to endure the defeats suffered on the 
battlefields in August 1918. They were nothing compared to the military 
victories that our nation achieved. Our downfall was not the result of those 
defeats. Rather, we were overthrown by a force that had prepared those 
defeats by systematically operating, for several decades, to steal the 
political and moral instincts and stamina that alone make a nation capable, 
and thus fit to exist. 

By neglecting the problem of preserving the racial foundations of our 
nation, the old Reich disregarded the sole right that allowed it to survive in 
this world. Nations that make mongrels of their people, or allow their 
people to be tumed into mongrels, sin against the will of eternal Providence. 
And thus their overthrow at the hands of a stronger opponent cannot be 
looked upon as a wrong but, on the contrary, as a restoration of justice. If 
a people refuses to guard and uphold the nature-given qualities that have 
their roots in the blood, then such a people has no right to complain over 
the loss of its earthly existence. 

Everything on this Earth can be improved. Every defeat can be the 
foundation of a future victory. Every lost war can be the cause of a later 
resurgence. Every hardship can give a new impetus to human energy. And 
from every oppression, forces can emerge that bring about a new spiritual 
rebirth—provided that the blood is kept pure. 

But the loss of racial purity will wreck inner happiness forever. It 
degrades men for all time. And the consequences can never be removed. 

If this single problem is studied and compared with the other problems 
of life, we will easily recognize how insignificant they are. They are all 
limited in time; but the problem of the maintenance or loss of the purity of 
the blood lasts as long as man himself. 

All symptoms of decline in the pre-war period can be traced back to 
racial causes. 


11.24 FAILURE TO RECOGNIZE THE INNER ENEMY 


Whether one is dealing with questions of general law or excesses of 
economic life, of symptoms of cultural decline or political degeneration, 
of defective schooling or the evil influence of the press over the adult 
population—always and everywhere, it’s a fundamental disregard for the 
racial needs of the nation. That is, the failure to recognize the danger posed 
by a foreign race. 


328 


CHAPTER11 


That’s why all attempts at reform, all institutions for social relief, all 

political striving, all economic progress, and all apparent increase in the 
general stock of knowledge, were futile, practically speaking. The nation 
and the organization that enables it to exist—the state—weren’t becoming 
healthier but, on the contrary, were languishing more and more. The false 
prosperity of the old Reich couldn’t disguise its inner weakness. And every 
attempt to invigorate it failed because the most important problem was 
disregarded. 
__ It would be a mistake to think that the followers of the various political 
parties that tried to fix the condition of the German people, or even all their 
leaders, were bad or malevolent in themselves. Their activity was doomed 
to failure simply because of the fact that they saw nothing but the symptoms 
of our general malady, and tried to treat the symptoms while overlooking 
the real cause of the disease. If one makes a methodical study of the 
political development of the old Reich, one cannot help seeing that, after a 
careful political analysis, a process of inner degeneration had already set 
in even at the time of German unification. The general situation was 
declining year by year, despite the apparent political success and increasing 
economic wealth. 

At the Reichstag elections, the growing number of Marxist votes 
indicated that the internal breakdown and political collapse were then rapidly 
approaching. All the victories of the so-called bourgeois parties were 
worthless—not only because they couldn’t prevent the numerical increase 
in the growing mass of Marxist votes, but mainly because they themselves 
were already infected with the ferment of decay. Though quite unaware of 
it, the bourgeois world was infected from within with the deadly poison of 
Marxist ideas. Their occasional resistance was due to the competitive strife 
among ambitious political leaders, rather than any principled opposition 
between adversaries who were determined to fight to the bitter end. 

During all those years, only one protagonist fought with steadfast 
perseverance, and that was the Jew. The Star of David steadily ascended 
as the will to national self-preservation declined. 

Therefore, in August 1914, it wasn’t a unified people resolved to attack 
that rushed to the battlefields. Rather, it was the last flicker of an instinct 
for national self-preservation against the creeping pacificist-Marxist 
paralysis of the national body. Even in those days of destiny, we didn’t 
recognize the internal enemy; therefore all external efforts were bound to 
be in vain. Providence didn’t grant her reward to the victorious sword, but 
followed the eternal law of retribution. 


329 


MEIN KAMPF 


A profound recognition of all this was the source of those principles 
and tendencies that inspire our new movement. We were convinced that, 
only by recognizing such truths, could we halt the German national decline 
and lay a granite foundation on which the state could again be built—one 
that would not be an alien mechanism for economic purposes and interests, 
but a national organism: 


A Germanic State 
for the German Nation. 


330 


CHAPTER 12: 

THE FIRST PERIOD 
OF DEVELOPMENT OF 
THE NATIONAL 
SOCIALIST GERMAN 
WORKERS’ PARTY 


If, at the close of this volume, I describe the first stage in the progress 
of our movement and give a brief account of the problems raised, it’s not 
because I seek to expound on the ideals of the movement. These are so 
momentous that they require a whole volume. Therefore I will devote the 
second volume of this book to a detailed survey of the principles that form 
the program of our movement, and attempt to draw a picture of what we 
mean by the word ‘state.’ 

When I say ‘we,’ I mean to include all those hundreds of thousands 
who have fundamentally the same longing, though in the individual cases 
they cannot find adequate words to describe their inner vision. It’s a 
noteworthy fact of all great reforms that, in the beginning, there is only one 
single champion to come forward on behalf of several million. The goal 
has often been the object of profound longing on the part of hundreds of 
thousands for many centuries, until finally one man comes forward to 
proclaim the will of the masses and become the standard-bearer of the old 
yearning—which he now leads to victory as a new idea. 

The fact that millions yearn at heart for a radical change in our present 
conditions is proven by their profound discontentment. This feeling is 
manifest in a thousand ways: in some as discouragement and despair, in 


331 


MEIN KAMPF 


others as resentment, anger, and indignation. One man reacts with 
indifference, another with violent excess. Other witnesses to this feeling 
are those who abstain from voting, as well as the many who tend to side 
with the fanatical leftwing extremists. 

It was to the latter that our young movement was intended to appeal. 
It wasn’t meant to be an organization for the contented and satisfied, but 
rather to embrace all those who were suffering from profound anxiety and 
could find no peace, the unhappy and the discontented. It wasn’t meant to 
float on the surface of the nation but rather to push its roots deep among 
the masses. 


12.1 SITUATION AFTER THE REVOLUTION 


Considered purely politically, the year 1918 presented the following 
picture: a people torn in two. One part, and by far the smaller of the two, 
contained the intellectual classes of the nation. Superficially this part is 
nationalistic, but this word means to them little more than a vague and 
feeble defense of so-called state interests, which are in turn identical to 
dynastic interests. This class tries to defend its ideas and reach its goals 
with intellectual weapons; these are fragmentary and superficial, and they 
fail completely in the face of the enemy’s brutality. With one violent blow, 
this class, which had previously governed, is now struck down. It trembles 
with fear and accepts every humiliation imposed on it by the ruthless victor. 

Against them stands a second class, the broad masses of manual 
laborers. This group is organized with a more or less radical Marxist 
tendency, and is determined to break any kind of intellectual resistance by 
the use of brute force. They have no nationalist tendencies whatsoever, and 
deliberately reject all national interests. On the contrary, they promote the 
interests of the foreign oppressor. Numerically this class is the strongest, 
and more importantly, includes all those elements necessary for a national 
resurgence. 

Already in 1918, one thing was clear: no resurgence of the German 
nation could take place without the restoration of outward-directed power. 
The prerequisites for this are not arms, as our bourgeois ‘statesmen’ babble, 
but rather the force of will. Earlier, the German people had more than 
enough arms. And yet they were not able to defend their liberty because 
they lacked those energies that spring from the instinct of national self- 
preservation: the will for self-preservation. Even the best armaments are 


332 


CHAPTER 2 


only dead and worthless material, as long as the spirit is lacking that makes 
men willing and determined to use them. Germany was rendered 
defenseless not for lack of arms, but for lack of will to protect its weapons 
for national survival. 

Today our leftwing politicians in particular are constantly insisting that 
their spineless, compliant, and in truth treasonous foreign policy results 
from a lack of arms. To this we must say: no, the opposite is true. Through 
your anti-national and criminal policy, you surrendered our arms. And now 
you try to make people believe that your miserable villany is essentially 
caused by the lack of arms. Just like everything else you do, this is a lie 
and falsification. 

But the politicians on the right deserve exactly the same reproach. It 
was through their miserable cowardice that those Jewish rabble came to 
power in 1918 to steal the nation’s arms. They too have neither right nor 
reason on their side when they appeal to disarmament as the cause of their 
prudence (which is to say, cowardice). Rather, our defenselessness is the 
result of their cowardice. 

Therefore the question of restoring Germany’s power is not, How can 
we manufacture arms? but: How we can produce that spirit which enables 
a people to bear arms? Once this spirit prevails among a people, then the 
will finds a thousand ways—each of which ends in a weapon! But a coward 
won’t fire even a single shot when attacked, even though he may have ten 
pistols. For him they are of less value than a knarled stick in the hands of 
a courageous man. 


12.2 RECOVERY OF POLITICAL POWER 


The problem of reestablishing the political power of our nation is 
primarily a problem of restoring the instinct of national self-preservation— 
if only because every preparatory step in foreign policy, and every 
judgment on the worth of a state, has been proved by experience to be 
grounded not on existing weapons but rather on the nation’s moral capacity 
for resistance. The ability to build alliances is determined not so much by 
the inert mass of arms but by the obvious presence of a sturdy will to 
national self-preservation and a heroic, death-defying courage. An alliance 
is not made between arms but between men. 

The British nation will therefore be considered as the most valuable 
ally in the world, as long as it can be counted upon to show that brutality 


333 


MEIN KAMPF 


and tenacity in its government, as well as in the spirit of the broad masses, 
that enables it to carry through to victory any struggle that it begins— 
regardless of duration or sacrifice. And all this, even though the actual 
military weaponry at hand may be utterly inadequate when compared with 
that of other nations. 

Once it’s understood that German restoration is a question of 
reawakening the will to political self-preservation, we can see quite clearly 
that it won’t be enough to win over those elements that are already national- 
minded, but only by the nationalization of the consciously anti-national 
masses. 


12.3 WINNING OVER THE BROAD MASSES 


A young movement that aims at reestablishing a German state with full 
sovereign powers will therefore have to direct its efforts entirely at winning 
over the broad masses. Our so-called ‘national bourgeoisie’ are so wretched, 
generally speaking, and their national spirit appears so feeble, that we can 
be sure they will offer no serious resistance to a powerful domestic or foreign 
policy. Even if the narrow-minded German bourgeoisie should maintain a 
passive resistance when the hour of deliverance is at hand—as they did in 
Bismarck’s time—we will never have to fear any active resistance on their 
part, because of their recognized and proverbial cowardice. 

It’s quite different with our internationalized masses. In their primitive 
roughness, they are predisposed to the idea of violence, while at the same 
time their Jewish leaders are more brutal and ruthless. They will crush any 
German revival, just as they smashed the German army by striking from 
the rear. Above all, these organized masses will use their numerical majority 
in this parliamentarian state not only to hinder any national foreign policy, 
but also to prevent Germany from restoring its political power abroad— 
thus making it undesirable as an ally. Not only are we ourselves aware of 
the wealaness in our 15 million Marxists, democrats, pacifists, and centrists; 
foreign countries also recognize this internal burden, and take it into 
consideration when considering possible alliances. No one allies himself 
with a state where the active portion of the population is even passively 
opposed to any resolute foreign policy. 

Added to this is the fact that the leaders of those parties that were 
responsible for the national betrayal are ready to oppose every attempt at 
a revival, simply to retain power. Historically speaking, it’s impossible for 


334 


CHAPTER 122 


the German people to recover their former position by retaliating against 
those who were the cause and occasion for the collapse of our state. Before 
the judgment seat of posterity, November 1918 will not be regarded as a 
simple rebellion but as high treason against the country. 

Therefore any possibility of regaining German independence depends 
upon, first and foremost, a recovery of the inner unity of the people’s will. 

Looked at from a technical standpoint, it seems absurd to think of 
liberating Germany as long as the masses aren’t willing to support an ideal 
of freedom. From a purely military point of view, every officer will agree 
that a war cannot be waged against an outside enemy by student battalions; 
together with the brains of the nation, fists are also necessary. 

Furthermore, it must be remembered that the nation would be robbed 
of irreplaceable assets by a national defense in which only the so-called 
intelligentsia were engaged. The young German intellectuals who joined 
the volunteer regiments and fell on the battlefields of Flanders in the 
autumn of 1914 were bitterly missed later on. They were the highest 
treasure that the nation possessed; their loss couldn’t be compensated in 
the course of the war. And it’s not only the struggle itself that couldn’t be 
waged without the working masses in the storm battalions, but also the 
necessary technical preparations couldn’t be made without an inner unity 
of the national will. 

Our nation—which has to exist disarmed, under a thousand eyes 
appointed by the Versailles Treaty—cannot make any technical 
preparations for the recovery of its freedom and human independence until 
the whole army of domestic spies is cut down to those few whose inborn 
baseness would lead them to betray anything and everything for the well- 
known 30 pieces of silver. But we can deal with such people. The millions, 
however, who are opposed to every kind of national revival simply because 
of their political opinions, constitute an insurmountable obstacle—as long 
as the cause of their opposition, the international Marxist worldview, is not 
overcome and banished from their hearts and minds. 

From whatever viewpoint we may examine the possibility of 
recovering our state and national independence—whether from the 
standpoint of technical rearmament or from that of the actual struggle 
itself—the necessary prerequisite always remains the same. This is the 
winning over of the broad masses to accept the principle of our national 
independence. 

If we don’t regain our external freedom, every domestic reform will, 
at best, be an increase in our productive powers as a colony. The surplus of 


335 


MEIN KAMPF 


any so-called economic improvement would only go into the hands of our 
international controllers, and any social betterment would at best increase 
the productivity of our labor for them. No cultural progress can be made 
by the German nation, because such progress is too much bound up with 
political independence and the dignity of our people. 

Therefore, if we can find a satisfactory solution for the problem of 
Germany’s future only by winning over the broad masses to the nationalist 
idea, this work of education must be considered the highest and most 
important task to be accomplished by a movement—that is, for one that 
doesn’t strive merely to satisfy the needs of the moment but considers 
everything only in light of future results. 


12.4 NATIONALIZATION OF THE MASSES 


Thus, as early as 1919, we were convinced that accomplishing the 
nationalization of the masses would constitute our highest aim. 

From a tactical standpoint, a number of obligations followed. ! 

(1) No social sacrifice could be considered too great, in order to win 
over the masses for a national revival. 

Any economic concessions granted today to employees are negligible 
when compared with the benefit to the whole nation if they contribute to 
bringing back the masses of the people to their own nation. Nothing but 
meanness and shortsightedness—which, unfortunately, are prevalent 
characteristics of our employers—could prevent people from recognizing that, 
in the long run, no economic improvement, and therefore no rise in profits, 
are possible unless the internal national solidarity of our people is restored. 

If the German unions had defended the interests of the working-classes 
uncompromisingly during the war; if, even during the war, they had used 
the labor strike a thousand times over to force the dividend-hungry 
industrialists to grant the workers’ demands; if at the same time they had 
stood up as good Germans for the national defense as stoutly as for their 
own claims; and if they had given to their country what was their country’s 
due—then the war would never have been lost. How ridiculously 
insignificant would all, and even the greatest, economic concessions have 
been in comparison with the tremendous importance of winning the war! 


' What follows are 14 numbered sections, constituting Hitler’s program of 
nationalization. 


336 


CHAPTER 22 


For a movement that plans to restore the German worker to the German 
people, it’s absolutely necessary to understand clearly that economic 
sacrifices should be utterly disregarded—provided, of course, that they 
don’t go as far as endangering the independence and stability of the national 
economic system. 

(2) The nationalistic education of the masses can be carried out only 
indirectly, by improving their social conditions. Only in this way can the 
economic conditions be created that enable everyone to participate in the 
cultural life of the nation. 

(3) The nationalization of the broad masses can never be achieved by 
half-measures—that is, by feebly insisting on a so-called objective 
standpoint—but only by a ruthless and devoted insistence on the one goal 
to be attained. This means that a people cannot be made ‘national’ in the 
sense of that word given by our bourgeois class today—with so many 
limitations—but rather in the vehement and extreme sense. Poison can be 
overcome only by an antidote, and only a shallow bourgeois mind could 
think that the middle way is the road to heaven. 

The broad masses of a nation are neither professors nor diplomats. 
They are only poorly acquainted with abstract ideas; their reactions lie more 
in the domain of the feelings. That’s where their positive or negative 
attitude lies. They respond only to an expression of force from one of the 
two extremes, and never to any half-measure that wavers between the two. 
Their emotional grounds also account for their extraordinary stability. Faith 
is stronger than knowledge; love is less changeable than respect; hate is 
more permanent than aversion. And the driving force that has brought about 
the most tremendous revolutions on this Earth has never been a scientific 
teaching that has gained power over the masses, but always a fanaticism 
that has inspired them—and sometimes even a hysteria that has driven them 
forward. 

Anyone who wishes to win over the masses must know the key that 
opens the door to their hearts. It’s not objectivity—meaning, weakness— 
but rather will and power. 

(4) The soul of the people can be won only if we carry through the 
positive struggle for our own aims, and also destroy the enemy that opposes 
them. 

When they see a ruthless attack on a foe, the people take it as proof of 
the rightness of such action. Conversely, when the aggressor renounces the 
destruction of the foe, this makes their rightness seem uncertain, if not an 
injustice. 


337 


MEIN KAMPF 


The masses are but a part of nature itself. Their feelings don’t allow 
them to understand hand-shaking between avowed enemies. They desire 
the victory of the stronger and the destruction of the weaker, or at least his 
unconditional submission. 

The nationalization of the masses will succeed only if, in the positive 
struggle to win the soul of the people, those international poisoners who 
oppose it are rooted out. 

(5) All the great questions of our time are questions of the moment, 
and are only the results of certain definite causes. And among all those, 
there is only one that has a profoundly causal significance, namely, the 
question of the racial preservation of the people. Human strength and 
weakness depends on the blood alone. Nations that are unaware of the 
importance of their racial stock are like men who try to educate the poodle 
to do the work of the greyhound—not understanding that both the speed 
of the greyhound and the docility of the poodle are inborn qualities, and 
these cannot be learned. A people that fails to preserve its racial purity 
thereby renounces the unity of the soul of the nation, in all its 
manifestations. A disintegrated national character is the inevitable result of 
a disintegration of the blood. And the change in the spiritual and creative 
forces of a people is only an effect of the change in their racial foundations. 

Whoever would free the German people from their vices of today— 
which did not spring from their original nature—must first rid them of the 
foreign viruses in the national body. 

The German nation will never be restored unless the racial problem, 
and hence the Jewish question, is clearly understood. 

The racial question supplies the key, not only to human history, but 
also to every kind of human culture. 

(6) By incorporating the internationalist masses into the national 
community, we don’t intend to neglect a safeguarding of trade and 
professional interests. Divergent professional interests are not the same as 
class division, butare inherent in our economic life. Professional grouping 
doesn’t clash at all with the idea of a national community, for this means 
national unity in regard to all those problems that affect the life of the nation 
as such. 

The integration of a professional group or class into the national 
community, or into the state, cannot be accomplished by lowering the 
higher classes, but only by raising up the lower classes. The class that 
carries through this process is never the higher class, but rather the lower— 
the one that’s fighting for equal rights. The bourgeoisie of today was not 


338 


CHAPTER 12 


incorporated in the state through measures of the nobility, but only by its 
own energy and leadership. 

The German worker cannot be raised and incorporated into the German 
national community via ineffectual talk of brotherhood, but by a systematic 
improvement in the social and cultural life of the worker—until the most 
serious differences are bridged. A movement that has this for its aim must 
try to recruit its followers mainly from the ranks of the workers. It may 
include members of the intellectual classes only insofar as they completely 
understand the goal to be achieved. This process of transformation and 
reunion cannot be completed within 10 or 20 years; it will take several 
generations, as experience has shown. 

The most difficult obstacle to the reunion of our contemporary worker 
with the national community doesn’t consist so much in the fact that he 
fights for the interests of his fellow workers, but rather in the international 
ideas with which he is imbued, and which are hostile to nationhood and 
fatherland. If inspired by the same leadership, the trade unions could tum 
millions of workers into the most valuable members of the national 
community, without thereby affecting their own struggles for their 
economic demands. 

A movement that sincerely tries to bring the German worker back into 
his people, and rescue him from the folly of internationalism, must wage a 
vigorous campaign against certain notions that are prevalent among the 
industrialists. One of these is that the employee is obliged to surrender all 
his economic rights to the employer and, further, that the workers would 
come into conflict with the national community if they attempted to defend 
their own justified interests. This assertion is a deliberate lie; the idea of a 
national community doesn’t impose any obligations on the one side that 
aren’t imposed on the other. 

A worker certainly sins against the spirit of the national community if 
he acts entirely on his own initiative and puts forward exaggerated demands 
without regard for the common good or the survival of the national 
economy. But an industrialist also does so ifhe adopts inhuman methods of 
exploitation and misuses the working forces of the nation, to make millions 
for himself unjustly from the sweat of the workers. He has no right to call 
himself ‘national,’ and no right to talk of a folk community; he’s only an 
unscrupulous egoist who sows the seeds of social discontent and provokes 
a spirit of conflict that sooner or later must harm the interests of the nation. 

The reservoir from which the young movement has to draw its 
members will primarily be the working masses. Those masses must be 


339 


MEIN KAMPF 


delivered from the clutches of the international delusion. They must be 
freed from social distress. They must be raised above their present cultural 
misery and transformed into a united and valuable factor in the folk 
community, inspired by nationalist ideas and sentiment. 

If, among nationalist intellectual circles, men can be found who 
genuinely love the people and eagerly anticipate the future of Germany, 
and at the same time have a sound grasp of the importance of a struggle 
for the soul of the masses, such men are cordially welcomed in the ranks 
of our movement. They can serve as a valuable intellectual force. But this 
movement can never aim at recruiting its membership from the herd of 
bourgeois voters. If it did so, the movement would be burdened with a 
group of people whose whole mentality would only paralyze our campaign 
to win over the masses. 

In theory, it may be true that the broad masses ought to be influenced 
by a combined leadership of the upper and lower social strata within the 
framework of the movement. But notwithstanding all this, the fact remains 
that, though it may be possible to exercise a psychological influence on the 
bourgeois classes and to arouse some enthusiasm or even awaken some 
understanding among them by our public demonstrations, their traditional 
characteristics—or better, vices—cannot be changed. Such vices are part 
of a tradition that has developed over centuries. The difference between 
the cultural levels of the two groups, and between their attitudes towards 
economic questions, is still so great that it would become an obstacle as 
soon as the initial enthusiasm of our demonstrations subsided. 

Finally, it’s not part of our program to transform the nationalist camp 
itself, but rather to win over those who are anti-nationalist. 

The strategy of the whole movement must finally be determined from 
this viewpoint. 

(7) This one-sided but clear approach must be manifested in the 
propaganda of the movement; and on the other hand, this is absolutely 
necessary on propagandist grounds. 

If propaganda is to be of service to the movement, it must be addressed 
to oneside alone. If it varies, the direction ofits appeal won’t be understood 
in the one camp or may be rejected by the other, as merely obvious and 
uninteresting; for there is a great difference in the intellectual training of 
the two camps in question. 

Even the style and tone can’t have the same effect in those two opposite 
extremes of the social structure. If the propaganda refrains from using 
primitive forms of expression, it won’t appeal to the sentiments of the 


340 


CHAPTER 122 


masses. If, on the other hand, it conforms to the crude sentiments of the 
masses in its words and gestures, it will be rejected by the so-called 
intellectual circles as coarse and vulgar. 

Among a hundred so-called orators, there are scarcely ten who are 
capable of speaking with effect before an audience of street-sweepers, 
locksmiths, sewer-cleaners, etc. today, and then lecturing with equal effect 
tomorrow before an audience of university professors and students. Among 
a thousand public speakers, there may be only one who can speak to 
locksmiths and professors in the same hall in such a way that his statements 
can be fully comprehended by each group, while at the same time he 
effectively influences both and awakens enthusiasm, to hearty applause. 
But it must always be remembered that even the most beautiful theory, in 
most cases, can reach the public only through smaller minds. 

What matters is not the vision of the man of genius who created the 
great idea, but rather the success that his prophets achieve in transmitting 
this idea to the broad masses. 

Social Democracy and the whole Marxist movement were particularly 
attractive because of the uniformity of the public to which they addressed 
their appeal. The more limited and narrow their ideas and arguments, the 
easier it was for the masses to grasp and assimilate them; those ideas and 
arguments were well-adapted to a low level of intelligence. 

These considerations led the new movement to adopt a clear and simple 
line: 

In both its message and forms of expression, propaganda must be kept 
on a level with the intelligence of the masses, and its value must be 
measured only by the actual results. 

At a public meeting of all classes, the best speaker is not the one who 
is closest to the intellectuals, but the one who knows how to win the hearts 
of the masses. 

An educated man who is present, and who finds fault with an address 
because of its low intellectual level—even though he sees its effect on the 
lower groups to be won over—only proves the incapacity of his thinking 
and his worthlessness to the new movement. The only useful intellectuals 
are those who understand its mission and its aims so well that they have 
learned to judge the propaganda exclusively by the success obtained, and 
never by the impression made on the intellectuals themselves. Our 
propaganda isn’t meant to serve as entertainment for those national-minded 
people, but to win over the enemies of nationalism—those who, 
nevertheless, are of our own blood. 


341 


MEIN KAMPF 


In general, those trends that I briefly summarized in the chapter on 
“War Propaganda’ determined the approach that we adopted in our 
campaign, and the manner in which we put it into practice.” 

Success proves that the decision was right. 

(8) The goal of any political reform movement can never be reached 
by trying to educate the public or influence those in power, but only by 
gaining political power. Every world-changing idea has not only the right 
but also the obligation to secure those means that enable it to be carried 
out. In this world, success is the only basis for judging right or wrong. And 
by ‘success’ we don’t mean the mere conquest of power—as in 1918—but 
an exercise of power that is beneficial to the nation. A coup d’etat cannot 
be considered successful if, as many empty-headed govemment lawyers in 
Germany now believe, the revolutionaries succeed in getting control of the 
state into their hands. It’s successful only if, in comparison with conditions 
under the old regime, the lot of the nation has been improved. This certainly 
does not apply to the German revolution, as that movement was called, 
which brought a gang of bandits into power in the fall of 1918. 

But if the conquest of political power is a prerequisite for the practical 
realization of the ideals that inspire a reform movement, then any 
movement that aims at reform must, from the very first, be considered as 
a movement of the masses—and not as a literary tea club, or a shopkeepers’ 
bowling society. 


12.5 HIGHEST AUTHORITY, HIGHEST RESPONSIBILITY 


(9) The nature and internal organization of the new movement must be 
anti-parliamentarian. That is, it rejects in general, and in its own structure, 
the principle of majority rule, and the idea that the leader is only the 
executor of the will and opinion of others. In things both small and large, 
the movement holds that one person must have absolute authority combined 
with highest responsibility. 

In our movement, the practical consequences of this principle are the 
following: 

The leader of a local group is appointed, and he is then the responsible 
leader of his group. All committees are subject to his authority, and not he 
to theirs. There is no such thing as committees that vote, but only 


2 See Chapter 6. 
342 


CHAPTER 22 


committees that work. This work is allotted by the responsible leader, who 
is the head of the group. The same principle applies to the higher 
organizations: precinct, district, and region. In each case the leader is 
appointed from above and is invested with full authority and executive 
power. Only the leader of the whole party is elected at the general meeting 
of the members. But he is the sole leader of the movement. All committees 
are responsible to him, but he is not responsible to the committees. His 
decision is final, but he bears the full responsibility for it. 

The members of the movement are entitled to call him to account by 
means of a new election, or to remove him from office, if he has violated 
the principles of the movement or has served it badly. He is then replaced 
by amore capable man who is invested with the same authority and obliged 
to bear the same responsibility. 

One of the highest duties of the movement is to make this principle an 
imperative—not only within its own ranks but also for the whole state. 

The man who wishes to become leader earns the highest and unlimited 
authority, but he also has to bear the final and gravest responsibility. 

The man who hasn’t the courage to shoulder responsibility for his 
actions isn’t fitted to be a leader. Only a hero is suited to the task. 

Human progress and culture are not a product of the majority, but rather 
are exclusively the work of personal genius and energy. 

A prerequisite for recovering the greatness and power of our nation is 
the cultivation of individual personality, and the establishment of its rights. 

Hence, our movement must necessarily be anti-parliamentarian. If it 
takes part in the parliamentary institution, it’s only for the purpose of 
destroying it—for doing away with an institution that we must look upon 
as one of the gravest symptoms of human decline. 


12.6 NEITHER MONARCHIST NOR REPUBLICAN 


(10) The movement steadfastly refuses to take any stand on questions 
that are either outside its political framework, or that are not of fundamental 
importance, and hence irrelevant. It doesn’t aim at a religious reformation, 
but rather a political reorganization of our people. It looks upon the two 
religious denominations as equally valuable mainstays for the existence of 
our people, and therefore it makes war on all those parties that would 
degrade this foundation—on which the religious and moral stability of our 
people is based—to an instrument in the service of party interests. 


343 


MEIN KAMPF 


Finally, the movement doesn’t aim at establishing any one form of state 
and fighting against another, but rather to create those fundamental 
principles without which no republic or monarchy can survive for any 
length of time. The movement doesn’t consider its mission to be the 
establishment of a monarchy or the preservation of a republic, but rather 
to create a German state. 

The question concerning the outer form of this state—which is to say, 
its final shape—is not of fundamental importance. This is something to be 
resolved only by questions of practical expediency. 

Once a people has understood and appreciated the great problems that 
affect its existence, the question of outer formalities will never lead to any 
internal conflict. 


12.7 THE NECESSARY EVIL OF ORGANIZATION 


(11) The question of the inner organization of the movement isn’t one 
of principle but of expediency. 

The best kind of organization isn’t that which places the largest 
intermediary apparatus between the leadership of the movement and the 
individual followers, but rather the smallest. It’s the task of such an 
organization to transmit a certain idea—which originated in the brain of 
one individual—to a multitude of people, and to supervise its realization. 

Therefore, organization is always only a necessary evil. At best it’s a 
means of reaching certain ends; at worst, it becomes an end in itself. 

Since the world produces more mechanical than intelligent beings, it’s 
always easier to develop the form of an organization than ideas per se. 

The march of any idea towards practical realization, especially those 
that seek to reform, may be roughly sketched as follows: 

A creative idea takes shape in the mind of someone, who thereby feels 
himself called upon to transmit this idea to humanity. He preaches his faith 
and gradually wins a certain number of followers. This direct and personal 
way of promoting one’s ideas among fellow men is the most ideal and 
natural. As the movement increases the number of followers of the new 
doctrine, it gradually becomes impossible for the original founder to 
continue exerting personal and direct influence on his followers, to guide 
and direct them. Proportionate to the growth of the community, direct 
communication become impossible; the ideal situation is gone, and is 
replaced by the necessary evil of organization. Small subsidiary groups 


344 


CHAPTER 22 


come into existence—as in the political movement, for example, where the 
local groups represent the germ-cells out of which the organization 
develops later on. 

But such sub-divisions must not occur until the authority of the spiritual. 
founder, and of the school he has created, are accepted without reservation. 
The importance of having one geographic center as the chief seat of the 
movement can’t be over-emphasized. Only the existence of such a place, 
around which is woven a magic spell—as with Mecca or Rome—can 
supply amovement with a permanent driving force based on internal unity, 
and with the recognition of one head as representing this unity. 

When the first organizational germ-cells are formed, care must always 
be taken to insist on the importance of the place where the idea originated. 
The creative, moral, and practical greatness of the place from which the 
movement emerged and is governed must be exalted to a supreme symbol. 
And all the more so, as the original cells of the movement become so 
numerous that they have to be reorganized into larger structural units. 

When the number of individual followers became so large that direct 
personal contact with the head of the movement was out of the question, 
then we formed those first local groups. As those groups multiplied, it was 
necessary to establish higher levels into which the local groups were 
distributed, designated as regional or precinct groups. 

Though it may be easy enough to maintain the original central authority 
over the lowest groups, it’s much more difficult to do so in relation to the 
higher units of organization. And yet this is an indispensable condition if 
the unity of the movement is to be guaranteed and the idea of it carried out. 

Finally, when those larger intermediary organizations have to be 
combined into new and still higher units, it becomes increasingly difficult 
to maintain the absolute supremacy of the original seat of the movement, 
its teachings, and so on. 

Consequently, the mechanical forms of an organization must only be 
introduced to the degree that the spiritual authority and ideals of the central 
seat are firmly established. In the political sphere, it may often happen that 
this supremacy can be provided only by practical power. 

From all this, the following principles were laid down for the inner 
structure of the movement: 

(a) All activity should be concentrated in one place: Munich. A band of 
absolutely reliable followers must be trained, and a school founded that 
would help to propagate the ideas. The necessary authority must be acquired 
for the future through the greatest possible visible successes in this one place. 


345 


MEIN KAMPF 


To make the movement and its leader known, it was necessary, not only 
to shatter the belief that the Marxist doctrine was invincible, but also to 
show that a counter-doctrine was possible. 

(b) Local groups couldn’t be established until the supremacy of the 
central authority in Munich was definitely acknowledged. 

(c) Precinct, regional, and provincial groups could be formed only after 
the need for them became evident, and only after the supremacy of the 
central authority was satisfactorily guaranteed. 

Further, the creation of subordinate organizational forms must depend 
on the availability and leadership of qualified men. 

This can occur in two ways: 

(a) The movement acquires the necessary funds to attract and train 
intelligent people who are capable of becoming leaders. The personnel thus 
obtained can then be systematically deployed according to tactical and 
efficiency demands. 

This solution is quicker and easier. But it demands large financial 
resources; the leaders will work in the movement only if they are paid a salary. 

(b) If the movement is not in a position to employ paid leaders, it must 
begin by depending on voluntary helpers. 

This way is slower and more difficult. 

The leaders of the movement must allow vast territories to lie fallow, 
unless someone comes forward to place himself at the service of the central 
authority for the purpose of organizing and directing the movement in the 
region concerned. 

It may happen that in extensive regions no one can be found. But at 
the same time, in other regions, two or three may appear whose capabilities 
are almost equal. The difficulty involved here is very great, and can be 
overcome only with the passing of the years. 

For the establishment of any branch of the organization, the prerequisite 
is always that a person can be found who is capable of leadership. 

Just as the army and all its organization units are useless if there are 
no officers, so any political organization is worthless if it hasn’t the right 
kind of leader. 

If an inspiring leader cannot be found for the organization and direction 
of a local group, it’s better to refrain from establishing it than to run the 
risk of failure after the group has been formed. 

Leadership requires not only will but also ability. And greater importance 
must be placed on will power and energy than on intelligence. Most valuable 
of all is a combination of ability, determination, and perseverance. 


346 


CHAPTER 12 


12.8 INNER STRUCTURE OF THE MOVEMENT 


(12) The future of a movement is determined by the devotion, and even 
intolerance, with which its members fight. Convinced of their correctness, 
they must carry it through to success against other similar organizations. 

It’s a great error to believe that the strength of a movement increases 
if it’s combined with other similar movements. Any such expansion will 
of course mean an increase in external size, which superficially appears as 
an increase of power. But in reality, the movement thereby admits outside 
elements that will subsequently lead to an inner weakening. 

Though it may be said that one movement is similar to another, in 
reality no such identity exists. Otherwise there would not be two 
movements, but only one. And whatever the difference may be—even if 
only in the abilities of the leaders—it is there. It’s against the natural law 
of all development to couple dissimilar organisms; rather, the stronger must 
overcome the weaker and, through this struggle, increase the constitutional 
force and effective strength of the victor. 

By combining political organizations that are approximately alike, 
certain immediate advantages may be gained. But in the long run, these are 
bound to become the cause of internal weaknesses that appear later on. 

A movement can become great only by the unhampered development 
of its internal strength, and by its steady growth leading up to a final victory 
over its competitors. 

One may safely say that the strength of a movement and its right to 
existence can be developed only as long as it remains true to the principle 
that struggle is a necessary condition of its progress. Its maximum strength 
will be reached only as soon as complete victory has been won. 

Therefore a movement must not strive to obtain merely immediate and 
transitory successes, but it must show a spirit of uncompromising perseverance 
in carrying through a long struggle that will secure for it a long period of growth. 

Movements that owe their expansion only to a so-called combination 
of similar structures—which means that their external strength is due to a 
policy of compromise—are like hothouse plants. They shoot up quickly 
but lack the inner strength to withstand the storms of centuries. 

The greatness of every powerful organization that embodies a creative 
idea lies in the spirit of religious devotion and intolerance with which it 
stands out against all others. If an idea is right in itself and, thus armed, 
wages war on this earth, then it is invincible. Every persecution will only 
add to its internal strength. 


347 


MEIN KAMPF 


The greatness of Christianity didn’t arise from attempts to make 
compromises with similar philosophical opinions of the ancient world, but 
in the unrelenting fanaticism in defending its own teaching. 

The apparent gains that a movement makes by joining with others is 
easily surpassed by the steady increase of strength that a doctrine and its 
organization acquires, if it remains independent and fights its own cause 
alone. 


12.9 EDUCATION FOR STRUGGLE 


(13) The movement must educate its adherents about the principle that 
struggle isn’t to be considered a necessary evil but rather as desired in itself. 
Therefore they must not fear the hostility of their adversaries, but they must 
take it as a necessary condition for their whole right to existence. They 
must not try to avoid the hatred of the enemies of our people and our 
worldview, but must welcome it. Lies and slander are among the 
manifestations of this hatred. 

The man who is not opposed, vilified, and slandered in the Jewish press 
is not a staunch German, and no true National Socialist. The best rule to 
measure the sincerity of his convictions, his character, and his strength of 
willis the hostility that his name arouses among the mortal enemies of our 
people. 

The followers of the movement, and indeed the whole nation, must be 
reminded again and again of the fact that the Jew and his newspapers are 
always spreading lies. If he tells the truth on some occasions, it’s only for 
the purpose of masking some greater deception, which turns the apparent 
truth into a deliberate falsehood. The Jew is the great master of lies.? Lies 
and deception are his weapons in struggle. 

Every Jewish slander and every Jewish lie is a scar on the bodies of 
our warriors. 

He whom they revile the most is nearest to us, and he whom they 
mortally hate is our best friend. 

Anyone who opens a Jewish newspaper in the morning and doesn’t 
find himself vilified there, has spent yesterday to no account. If he had 
achieved something, he would be persecuted, slandered, derided, abused, 
and besmirched. Those who effectively combat this mortal enemy of our 


3 Again recalling Schopenhauer. See Chapter 10.4, note 3. 


348 


CHAPTER 122 


people, who is at the same time the enemy of all Aryan peoples and culture, 
can only expect to arouse opposition on the part of this race and become 
the object of its slanderous attacks. 

When these truths become part of the flesh and blood of our members, 
then the movement will be impregnable and invincible. 


12.10 EDUCATION FOR RESPECT OF THE PERSON 


(14) The movement must use all possible means to cultivate respect 
for the individual personality. It must never forget that all human values 
are based on personal values, and that every idea and achievement is the 
fruit of the creative power of one man. Admiration for everything great is 
a tribute to one creative personality, and all those who feel such admiration 
become thereby united. 

Nothing can take the place of the individual. This is especially true 
when the individual embodies in himself not the mechanical but the 
creative and cultural element. No pupil can take the place of the master in 
completing a great picture that was left unfinished; and just in the same 
way, no substitute can take the place of the great poet or thinker, or the 
great statesman or military general. Their activity lies in the realm of art. 
It can never be mechanically acquired, because it’s an innate product of 
divine grace. 

The greatest revolutions and the greatest achievements of this world, its 
greatest cultural works and the immortal creations of great statesmen, are 
inseparably bound up with one name, and are represented by it. The failure 
to pay tribute to one of those great spirits signifies a neglect of that enormous 
source of power that lies in the names of all great men and women. 

The Jew knows this best of all. He, whose great men have always been 
great only in their efforts to destroy mankind and its culture, worships them 
as idols. But he attempts to stigmatize respect for a nation’s own great 
spirits as unworthy; this he labels a ‘personality cult.’ 

As soon as a people has so lost its courage as to submit to this Jewish 
arrogance and defamation, it renounces the most important source of its 
own inner strength. This is not a pandering to the masses, but a veneration 
of genius, ennoblement, and enlightenment. 

When men’s hearts are breaking and their souls despair, their great 
forebears turn their eyes towards them from the dim shadows of the past— 
they who knew how conquer anxiety and affliction, despair and misery, 


349 


MEIN KAMPF 


mental servitude and physical bondage—and extend their eternal hands to 
despairing souls! 
Woe to the nation that is ashamed to grasp them! 


12.11 DANGER OF OBSCURITY 


During the initial phase of our movement, our greatest handicap was 
the fact that none of us were known and our names meant nothing—a fact 
that then seemed to diminish our chances for success. Our most difficult 
task then—when it was often only six, seven, or eight of us—was to make 
everyone in this tiny circle believe that there was a tremendous future in 
store for the movement. 

Consider that only six or seven poor devils, who were entirely 
unknown, came together to found a movement that would succeed in doing 
what the great mass parties had failed to do: namely, to reconstruct a 
German Reich of greater power and glory. We would have been very 
pleased if we were attacked or even ridiculed. But the most depressing fact 
was that no one paid any attention to us at all. This utter lack of interest in 
us caused me the greatest suffering at the time. 

When I entered the circle of those few men, there was no question of 
a party or a movement. I already described my initial impressions of that 
small organization. Subsequently, I had time and the occasion to study the 
form of this so-called party, which at first looked so impossible. By God, 
the picture was quite depressing and discouraging. There was nothing; 
absolutely nothing at all. There was only the name of a party. And the 
committee consisted of all the party members. Somehow or other, it seemed 
just like the kind of thing we were fighting against—a miniature parliament. 
The voting system ruled. When the great parliament cried until they were 
hoarse, at least they shouted about problems of importance. Here, this small 
circle engaged in interminable discussions as to how they might answer 
the letters that they were delighted to have received! 

Needless to say, the public knew nothing of all this. In Munich, nobody 
knew of our party, not even by name, except our few members and their 
few friends. 

Every Wednesday, a so-called committee meeting was held in one of 
the Munich cafés, and a lecture was arranged for one evening each week. 
In the beginning, all the members of the movement were also members of 
the committee; therefore all the faces were the same. Now the task was to 


350 


CHAPTER 122 


extend the narrow limits of this small circle and get new members; but 
above all, to make the movement known at any price. 

We chose the following technique: 

Monthly—and later, every two weeks—we decided to hold a ‘meeting.’ 
Some of the invitations were typewritten, and others were written by hand. 
For the first few meetings, we distributed them in the streets and delivered 
them personally. Each solicited among his own acquaintances and tried to 
persuade some of them to attend our meetings. 

The result was lamentable. 

I still remember how I once personally delivered 80 of these invitations, 
and how we waited in the evening for the crowds to come. 

After an hour, the ‘chairman’ finally had to open the ‘meeting.’ Again 
there were only seven men: the same old seven. 


12.12 THE FIRST MEETING 


We then changed our methods. We had the invitations typed in a 
Munich stationery shop, and then mimeographed them. The result was that 
a few more people attended our next meeting. The number increased 
gradually: from 11 to 13, then to 17, to 23, and finally to 34. 

We collected some money within our own circle, each poor devil giving 
a small contribution. In that way, we raised sufficient funds to be able to 
advertise one of our meetings in the Munich Observer, which was still an 
independent paper. This time we had an astonishing success. We chose the 
Munich Hofbréuhaus Keller (not to be confused with the Munich 
Hofbrauhaus Festsaal) as our meeting place. It was a small hall and would 
accommodate scarcely more than 130 people. To me, however, the hall 
seemed enormous, and we were all worried that this ‘mighty’ edifice might 
remain partly empty on the night of the meeting.’ 

At 7:00 pm, 111 people were present, and the meeting was opened. 

A Munich professor delivered the principal address, and I spoke after 
him. That was my first time speaking in public. 

The whole thing seemed very daring to Herr Harrer, who was the first 
chairman of the party. He was a very decent fellow; but he believed that I, 
despite a number of good qualities, had no talent for public speaking. Even 
later, he couldn’t be persuaded to change his opinion. 





4 This was on 16 October 1919. 


351 


MEIN KAMPF 


Things turned out differently. I was allotted 20 minutes for my speech 
on this occasion, which might be looked upon as our first public meeting. 

I spoke for 30 minutes. And something that I always felt deep down in 
my heart, without really knowing, was here proven to be true: I could 
speak! After my 30 minutes, the people in the little hall were electrified. 
Their enthusiasm found its first expression in the fact that my appeal to 
those present brought us donations of 300 marks. That was a great relief 
for us. Our finances at that time were so meager that we couldn’t afford to 
have our party slogans printed, or even distribute leaflets. Now we at least 
possessed the nucleus of a fund from which we could pay our most urgent 
and necessary expenses. 


12.13 SOLDIERS AS THE BASIS OF THE MOVEMENT 


But the success of this first larger meeting was also important from 
another point of view. 

I had already begun to introduce some young and fresh members into 
the committee. During the long period of my military service, I had come 
to know a large number of good comrades whom I was now able to persuade 
to join our party. All of them were energetic and disciplined young men 
who, through their years of military service, had been imbued with a 
principle: Nothing is impossible, and that where there’s a will, there’s a way. 

The need for this supply of fresh blood became evident to me after just 
a few weeks of collaboration. 

Herr Harrer, who was first chairman of the party, was a journalist by 
profession, and as such he was widely educated. But as leader of the party, 
he had one very serious handicap: he couldn’t speak to a crowd. Though 
he did his work conscientiously, it lacked the necessary driving force— 
probably because he had no oratorical gifts whatsoever. Herr Drexler, at 
that time chairman of the local Munich group, was a simple working man. 
He, too, was not of any great significance as a speaker, and moreover he 
wasn’t a soldier, even during the war. This man, who was feeble and 
uncertain by nature, had missed the only school that knows how to 
transform such types into real men. 

Therefore neither of those two men was made of the stuff that would 
have enabled them to stir up an ardent and indomitable faith in the ultimate 
triumph of the movement. Neither could brush aside with obstinate force 
and, if necessary, brutal ruthlessness, all obstacles that stood in the path of 


352 


CHAPTER 2 


the new idea. Such a task could be carried out only by men whose bodies 
and souls had been trained in those military virtues that perhaps can be 
described as: swift as a greyhound, tough as leather, and hard as Knupp steel. 

At that time I was still a soldier. Outside and inside, I had the polish of 
six years of service, and so I must have looked quite strange in this circle. 
I had forgotten such phrases as: “That won’t work,” or “That’s impossible,” 
or “That’s too risky,” or “That’s too dangerous,” and so on. 

The whole thing was dangerous. In 1920, there were many parts of 
Germany where it would have been absolutely impossible to openly invite 
people to a national meeting that dared to make a direct appeal to the 
masses. Those who attended such meetings were usually dispersed and 
driven away with bleeding heads. It certainly didn’t call for any great skill 
to do things in that way. The largest so-called bourgeois mass meetings 
were accustomed to dissolving and scattering like rabbits frightened by a 
dog, at the sight of a dozen communists. 

The Reds used to pay little attention to those bourgeois organizations 
where only babblers talked. They recognized their inner triviality and 
harmlessness better than the members themselves. They were determined 
to use all means of ridding themselves of a dangerous movement. Their 
most effective means in such cases have always been terror and brute force. 

Marxist deceivers of the public naturally hated most of all a movement 
whose declared aim was to win over those masses that had previously been 
exclusively at the service of international Marxist and Jewish stock-exchange 
parties. The very title ‘German Workers’ Party’ irritated them. It could easily 
be foreseen that, at the first opportune moment, we would have to confront 
the Marxist despots, who were still intoxicated with their victory.° 

In the small circles of our own movement, people showed a certain 
amount of anxiety at the thought of such a conflict. 

They wanted to avoid coming out into the open, because they feared 
being beaten. In their minds, they saw our first public meetings broken up 
and feared that the movement was ruined forever. I found it difficult to 
defend my own position: that conflict shouldn’t be avoided but openly 
confronted, and that we should acquire the arms necessary for protection 
against violence. Terror cannot be overcome by the mind but only by 
counter-terror. The success of our first public meeting strengthened my 
own position. The members felt encouraged to arrange for a second 
meeting, on an even larger scale. 


> Of 1918. 
353 


MEIN KAMPF 


12.14 SECOND MEETING 


Around October 1919, the second larger meeting took place in the 
Eberlbraéu Keller. Theme: ‘Brest-Litovsk and Versailles.’ There were four 
speakers. I spoke for almost an hour, and the success was even more 
striking than at our first meeting. The number of people who attended had 
grown to more than 130. An attempted disturbance was immediately 
stopped by my comrades. The would-be disrupters were thrown down the 
stairs, with gashed heads. 

Two weeks later, another meeting took place in the same hall. The 
attendance had now increased to more than 170, and the room was fairly 
well filled. I spoke again, and once more it was more successful than at the 
previous meeting. 

I then proposed a larger hall. After looking around, we found one at 
the other end of the town, in the ‘Deutschen Reich’ on Dachauer Strasse. 
The first meeting there had a smaller attendance than the previous meeting: 
barely 140 people. The committee members got discouraged; those who 
had always been skeptical were now convinced that this drop-off was due 
to the fact that our events were held too frequently. There were vociferous 
discussions, in which I defended my own view, that a city with 700,000 
inhabitants should be able to stand not one meeting every couple weeks, 
but ten every week. I held that we shouldn’t be discouraged by a setback, 
that the tactics we had chosen were correct, and that sooner or later success 
would be ours—if we only continued with determined perseverance to push 
ahead on our path. This whole winter of 1919-1920 was one continual 
struggle to strengthen confidence in our ability to carry the movement 
through to success, and to instill a burning faith that could move mountains. 

The next meeting in the small hall proved me correct. Our audience 
increased to more than 200. The publicity effect and financial success were 
spectacular. 

I immediately urged that a further meeting be held. It took place in less 
than two weeks, and there were more than 270 people there. 

Two weeks later, we invited our followers and their friends, for the 
seventh time, to attend our meeting. The same hall was scarcely large 
enough for the number that came. They amounted to more than 400. 


354 


CHAPTER 2 


12.15 INNER FORMATION OF THE MOVEMENT 


It was at this time that the young movement developed its inner form. 
Sometimes we had more or less violent discussions within our small circle. 
Various sides—then as now—objected to the idea of calling the young 
movement a party. I’ve always considered such criticism as a demonstration 
of the critic’s practical incapacity and narrow-mindedness. Those 
objections have always been raised by men who couldn’t differentiate 
between external appearances and inner strength, but tried to judge the 
movement by the high-sounding character of its name. To this end, they 
ransacked the vocabulary of our ancestors, with unfortunate results. 

At that time, it was very difficult to make the people understand that 
every movement is a party as long as it hasn’t brought its ideals to final 
victory and thus achieved its purpose. It’s a party even if it takes a thousand 
different names. 

If anyone tries to carry out an original idea whose realization would be 
for the benefit of his fellow men, he will first have to look for disciples who 
are ready to fight for his goals. And if these ends don’t go beyond the 
destruction of the party system and thus put a stop to the process of 
disintegration, then all those who come forward as propagators of such an 
ideal are a party in themselves—as long as their final goal hasn’t been 
reached. It’s only hair-splitting and playing with words when these 
antiquated theorists, whose practical success is in inverse proportion to their 
wisdom, presume to think they can change the character of a movement— 
which is at the same time a party—merely by changing its name. 

On the contrary. 

It’s highly distasteful to toss around old Germanic expressions that are 
neither appropriate for our present day, nor represent anything concrete. 
This deceives people into thinking that the importance of movement lies 
in its external vocabulary. This is areal menace, and unfortunately is quite 
prevalent today. 

At that time, and later, I had to warn followers repeatedly against these 
German folklore-ish wandering scholars who never accomplished anything 
positive or practical, except to cultivate their own overflowing self-conceit.® 
Anéw movement must guard itself against an influx of people whose only 
recommendation is their own declaration—the same one that they have 


6 Hitler refers here to the leaders of other right-wing parties, with whom he was 
in competition. 


355 


MEIN KAMPF 


been fighting for during the last 30 or 40 years. Anyone who has fought 
for an idea for 40 years, and has no positive results to show for it—not 
even of hindering their opponents—then the story of those 40 years of futile 
efforts provides sufficient proof for their incompetence. The chief danger 
is that they don’t want to participate in the movement as ordinary members, 
but prefer to discuss their leadership of circles in which only they are 
qualified to carry on their work. 

Woe to a young movement, if its conduct falls into such hands! A 
businessman who has been in charge of a great firm for 40 years, and who 
has completely destroyed it, isn’t qualified to run a new firm. In the same 
way, any folkish Methuselah who has ineffectively preached an idea for 40 
years, is utterly unqualified for the leadership of a new movement! 


12.16 TINSWORDS AND TANNED BEARSKINS 


Furthermore, only a small portion of such people join a new movement 
to serve it. In most cases, they come because they think that, within the 
new movement, they will be able to promulgate their old ideas—to the 
misfortune of others. Anyhow, no one ever seems able to describe what 
exactly these ideas are. 

It’s typical of such people that they rant about ancient Teutonic heroes 
of the dim and distant ages, stone axes, battle spears, and shields; whereas 
in reality they themselves are the biggest cowards imaginable. Those very 
same people who brandish Teutonic tin swords and wear tanned bearskins, 
with ox horns mounted over their bearded faces, proclaim that all 
contemporary conflicts must be decided by intellectual weapons alone. And 
then they scatter when the first communist cudgel appears. Posterity will 
have little occasion to write a new epic about their heroic existence. 

I’ve seen too much of those kind of people not to feel a profound 
contempt for their miserable play-acting. To the broad masses, they are just 
an object of ridicule; and the Jew finds it to his own interest to treat these 
folk-lore comedians with respect, and he prefers them to true fighters for a 
German state. And yet these comedians are extremely proud of themselves. 
Notwithstanding their proven incompetence, they pretend to know 
everything better than other people—so much so that they become a real 
plague to all sincere and honest patriots, to whom not only the heroism of 
the past is worthy of honor, but who also feel bound to leave examples of 
their own work for the inspiration of posterity. 


356 


CHAPTER 22 


Among those people, it’s often hard to distinguish between those who 
are merely stupid and incompetent, and those who have a definite rationale. 
My impression, especially with the so-called religious reformers based on 
ancient Germanic customs, is that they are sent by those who don’t wish to 
see a national revival of our people. Their whole activity leads people away 
from the common struggle against the common enemy, the Jew. 

This causes people to waste their strength on senseless and ruinous 
religious controversies. These are the grounds for an authoritative and 
dominant centralizing force in the movement. Only in this way can it 
counteract the activity of such ruinous elements. And that’s why these folk- 
lore wandering Jews are so hostile to any movement whose members are 
firmly united under one leader and one discipline. They hate such a 
movement because it’s capable of putting a stop to their mischief. 


12.17 REJECTION OF THE WORD ‘FOLKISH’ 


It was not without good reason that we laid down a clearly defined 
program for the new movement that excluded the word ‘folkish.’ The 
concept underlying this term cannot serve as the basis of a movement, 
because it’s too vague and general in its application. Because this concept 
is so indefinite from a practical viewpoint, it gives rise to various 
interpretations and thus people can more easily invoke its authority. The 
insertion of such a vague and ill-defined concept into a political movement 
tends to break up the disciplined solidarity of the fighting forces, because 
it allows each individual to define his own concept of faith and will. 

It’s disgraceful to see the kind of people who run around nowadays with 
the word ‘folkish’ on their caps, and how they have their own interpretation 
of this concept. A well-known professor in Bavaria—a famous combatant 
who fights only with intellectual weapons, and who boasts of having 
marched against Berlin—believes that the concept of folkish is the same as 
monarchical. But this learned authority failed to explain the identity between 
our German monarchs and the present-day concept of folkish. I think he 
would have a very hard time. It would be very difficult indeed to imagine 
anything less folkish than most of those German monarchical states. Had 
they been otherwise, they wouldn’t have disappeared. Or if they were 
folkish, then their collapse would prove the failure of the folkish worldview. 

Everyone interprets this concept in his own way. But to make such 
diverse opinions the basis of a political struggle is out of the question. 


357 


MEIN KAMPF 


I won’t even mention the unworldliness, and especially the failure to 
understand the popular soul, that’s displayed by these folkish St. Johns of 
the 20" century. It suffices to point to the ridicule heaped upon them by the 
Left. They allow them to babble on, and then laugh. 


12.18 ‘INTELLECTUAL WEAPONS,’ ‘SILENT WORKERS’ 


I don’t put much value on the friendship of people who don’t succeed 
in getting hated by their enemies. Therefore, we considered the friendship 
of such people as not only worthless, but even dangerous to our young 
movement. That was the main reason why we first called ourselves a 
‘party.’ We hoped that, by giving ourselves such a name, we might scare 
away a whole host of folkish dreamers. And secondly, that was why we 
named ourselves The National Socialist German Workers’ Party. 

The first term, ‘party,’ kept away all those dreamers who live in the 
past and all the lovers of bombastic nomenclature, those advocates of the 
so-called ‘folkish idea.’ Secondly, the full name of the party kept away all 
those knights of the ‘intellectual sword’—all those wretches whose 
‘intellectual weapons’ hid their cowardice. 

It was only to be expected that this latter class would attack us the 
hardest—not.actively, of course, but only with their pens. This is the only 
weapon of the folkish goose-quills. To them, our principle “We shall meet 
violence with violence in our own defense,” was terrifying. They reproached 
us bitterly, not only for what they called our crude worship of the cudgel, 
but also because, according to them, of our lack of spirit as such. They didn’t 
realize for a moment that even a Demosthenes’ could be reduced to silence 
at a mass-meeting by 50 idiots who had come there to shout him down and 
use their fists against his supporters. Their innate cowardice prevents them 
from exposing themselves to such a danger; they always work ‘silently’ and 
never dare to make ‘noise,’ or to come forward in public. 

Even today, I must warn our young movement in the strongest possible 
terms to guard against falling into the snare of those so-called ‘silent 
workers.’ They are not only cowards but also, and always will be, 
incompetents and do-nothings. A man who is aware of certain things and 
knows that danger threatens, and at the same time sees the possibility of a 


7 Famed orator and stateman of ancient Athens, contemporary of Aristotle. Lived 
circa 350 BC. 


358 


CHAPTER DL 


certain remedy, has an obligation not to work ‘in silence’ but openly and 
publicly. He must fight against the evil, and for its cure. If he does not, then 
he is a timid weakling who fails from cowardice, laziness, or incompetence. 

Most of these ‘silent workers’ generally pretend to know God-knows- 
what. They do nothing but try to fool the world with their tricks. Though 
quite indolent, they try to create the impression that their ‘silent’ work keeps 
them very busy. In short, they are sheer swindlers—political crooks who 
hate the honest work of others. When you find one of these folkish moths 
buzzing over the value of his ‘silence,’ you may bet a thousand-to-one that 
you are dealing with someone who does nothing productive at all, but 
steals—steals the fruits of others’ labor. 

Additionally, one should note the arrogance and conceited impudence 
with which these obscurantist idlers try to tear to pieces the work of other 
people—criticizing it with an air of superiority, and thus aiding the mortal 
enemy of our people. 

Every last agitator, who has the courage to stand on a beerhall-table 
amid his enemies and manfully and openly defend his position, achieves a 
thousand times more than these lying, treacherous sneaks. He will at least 
convert one or another to the movement. One can examine his work and 
test its effectiveness by its actual results. Only those cowardly swindlers— 
who praise their own ‘silent’ work and shelter themselves under the 
despicable cloak of anonymity—are just worthless and, in the truest sense 
of the term, useless drones, for the purpose of our national reconstruction. 


12.19 FIRST GREAT MASS MEETING 


In the beginning of 1920, I put forward the idea of holding our first mass 
meeting. There were differences of opinion amongst us. Some leading 
members of our party thought that the time was not ripe for such a meeting, 
and that the outcome might be detrimental. The Red press began to take notice 
of us, and we were lucky enough to arouse their hatred. We had begun to 
appear at other meetings and to ask questions or contradict the speakers, and 
naturally we were shouted down. But still we thereby gained some success. 
People got to know us; and the better they understood us, the stronger was 
their aversion and their enmity. Therefore we expected that a large contingent 
of our friends from the Red camp would attend our first mass meeting. 

I fully realized that our meeting would probably be broken up. But we had 
to face the fight; if not now, then some months later. Since the first day of our 


359 


MEIN KAMPF 


founding, we were resolved to secure the future of the movement by fighting 
our way forward in a spirit of blind faith and ruthless determination. I was well- 
acquainted with the mentality of all those on the Red side, and I knew quite 
well that if we opposed them, not only would we make an impression but we 
might even win new followers. Thus we had to be resolved to put up resistance. 

Herr Harrer was then chairman of our party. He didn’t support my view 
as to the opportune time for our first mass meeting. Accordingly, as an 
honest and upright man, he resigned from the leadership of the movement. 
Herr Anton Drexler took his place. I kept the work of organizing the 
propaganda in my own hands and uncompromisingly carried it out. 

We decided on 24 February 1920 as the date for the first great mass 
meeting of the still-unknown movement. 

I made all the preparatory arrangements personally. They were very 
brief. The whole apparatus of our organization was designed to make rapid 
decisions. Within 24 hours, we had to decide on the attitude we would take 
in regard to the questions that would be put forth at the mass meeting. They 
would be announced on posters and leaflets, whose content followed the 
guidelines that I have already laid out regarding propaganda in general:® 
appeal to the broad masses; concentration on a few points; constant 
repetition; concise and dogmatic expression of ideas; perservance in 
distribution; and patience in awaiting the effect. 

For our principal color, we chose red; it has an exciting effect on the 
eye and was therefore calculated to arouse and provoke our opponents. 
Thus they would have to remember us—whether they liked it or not. 

Subsequently, the inner fraternization in Bavaria between the Marxists 
and the Center Party became clear. The ruling Bavarian People’s Party’ did 
its best to counteract the effect that our posters had on the Red working 
masses. Later they moved to prohibit them. If the police could find no other 
grounds for doing so, then they could claim that we were ‘disturbing the 
traffic’ in the streets. And thus the so-called German National People’s 
Party pleased their inner, silent Red ally by completely banning those 
posters—posters that brought back hundreds of thousands of workers to 
their own people, who had been incited and seduced by internationalism. 
These posters—appended to the first and second editions of this book'!°— 
bear witness to the bitterness of the struggle in which the young movement 


8 That is, in Chapter 6. 
° They were affiliated with the Center Party. 
'0 Not included here. 


360 


CHAPTER 12 


was then engaged. Future generations will find in them a documentary 
proof of our determination and the justice of our own cause. And they show 
the despotism of our so-called national officials, who acted against us 
because we were nationalizing the broad masses of the people. 


12.20 POHNER AND FRICK 


These posters will also help to destroy the idea that there was then a 
national government in Bavaria. They also show that if Bavaria remained 
nationally-minded during the years 1919, 1920, 1921, 1922, and 1923, this 
was not due to a national government but because they were compelled to 
acknowledge the growing national sentiment among the people. 

The government authorities themselves did everything in their power 
to restrict this process of recovery, and to make it impossible. 

Two men, though, must be mentioned as exceptions. 

Ernst Péhner, chief of police at the time, and his loyal advisor and chief 
deputy Frick, were the only men with the courage to place the interests of the 
country above their own jobs.!! Of those in responsible positions, Ernst Péhner 
was the only one who didn’t curry favor with the masses but felt that his duty 
was towards the nation as such. He was ready to risk and sacrifice everything, 
even his personal livelihood, to help in the restoration of the German people, 
whom he dearly loved. For that reason he was a bitter thorn in the side of the 
venal group of government officials who simply followed orders without 
considering the interests and needs of the people. They had no thought 
whatsoever for the national welfare that had been entrusted to their care. 

Above all, Péhner was one of those people who, in contrast with the 
majority of our so-called defenders of the state, wasn’t afraid to incur the 
enmity of the traitors to the country and the nation, but rather courted it as 
a mark of honor and honesty. For him, the hatred of the Jews and Marxists, 
and the lies and slanders they spread, were the only source of happiness in 
the midst of national misery. 

A man of granite loyalty, he was an ascetic character of the classical 
era, a straightforward German, for whom the saying ‘Better dead than a 
slave’ is not an empty phrase but the essence of his being. 

"| Ernst Pohner (1870-1925) was the Munich police chief from 1919 to 1922. 
Wilhelm Frick (1877-1946) was Pohner’s deputy, and ultimately served in 


Hitler’s cabinet for over 10 years. He was convicted at Nuremburg and 
sentenced to death by hanging. 


361 


MEIN KAMPF 


In my eyes, he and his collaborator, Dr. Frick, are the only men holding 
state positions who have the right to be considered as co-creators of a 
national Bavaria. 


12.21 DRAFTING THE PROGRAM 


Before holding our first great mass meeting, it was necessary not only 
to have our propaganda material ready but also to have the main points of 
our program printed. 

In the second volume of this book, I’ll develop the guiding principles 
that we then followed in drawing up our program. Here I will only say that 
the program was arranged, not merely to set forth the form and content of 
the young movement, but also with the goal of making it understood among 
the broad masses. 

The so-called intellectual circles made jokes and sneered at it, and then 
tried to criticize it. But the effectiveness of our program has proven that 
the ideas of that time were right. 

During these years, I saw dozens of new movements arise and disappear 
without leaving a trace. A single one remains: the National Socialist German 
Workers’ Party. Today I am more convinced than ever before that, though they 
may combat us and try to paralyze our movement, and though petty party 
ministers may forbid us to speak, they cannot prevent the triumph of our ideas. 

When both the present system of state administration and the names 
of its advocates are forgotten, the fundamentals of the National Socialist 
program will supply the basis for a future state. 

Our four months of meetings held before January 1920 slowly enabled 
us to collect the financial means necessary to have our first leaflets, posters, 
and programs printed. 


12.22 AMOVEMENT ON THE MARCH 


I’ll bring the first part of this book to a close by referring to our first 
great mass meeting, because it marked the occasion on which it burst the 
bounds of a small club and began to exert an influence on the most 
powerful factor of our time: public opinion. 

I myself had but one concern at that time: Will the hall be filled, or will 
we speak to a gaping void? I was firmly convinced that if only the people 


362 


CHAPTER 2 


would come, this day would turn out to be a great success for the young 
movement. And so I waited impatiently for the evening to come. 

The meeting would begin at 7:30 pm. At 7:15, I walked through the chief 
hall of the Hofbréuhaus on the Platz in Munich, and my heart nearly burst 
with joy. The great hall—for at that time, it seemed very big to me—was filled 
to overflowing, shoulder to shoulder. Nearly 2,000 people were present. And 
above all, those people had come whom we had always wished to reach. More 
than half of the audience seemed to be communists or independents. Our first 
great demonstration was destined, in their view, to come to an abrupt end. 

But things happened otherwise. When the first speaker finished, I got 
up to speak. After a few minutes, I was met with a hailstorm of interruptions, 
and violent encounters broke out in the hall. A handful of my loyal war 
comrades and some other followers wrestled with the disturbers and 
gradually restored order. I continued my speech. After half an hour, applause 
began to drown the interruptions and the shouting. 

I now took up the program, and began to explain it for the first time. 

Minute by minute, the interruptions was increasingly drowned out by 
shouts of applause. I finally came to explain the 25 points, and laid them 
out, point after point, before the masses.'? As I asked them to pass their own 
judgment on each point, one after another was accepted with increasing 
enthusiasm—unanimously and again unanimously. When the last point was 
reached and found its way to the heart of the masses, I had before me a hall 
full of people united by a new conviction, a new faith, and a new will. 

After nearly four hours, the hall began to clear. As the masses streamed 
towards the exit, crammed shoulder to shoulder, shoving and pushing, I 
knew that a movement was now set afoot among the German people that 
would never be forgotten. 

A fire was kindled, from whose flame the sword would be fashioned 
that would restore freedom to the German Siegfried, and bring life back to 
the German nation. 

And alongside the coming revival, I sensed that the Goddess of 
Inexorable Vengeance was now getting ready to redress the treason of 9 
November 1918. 

The hall slowly emptied. 

The movement was on the march. 


2 Listed in Appendix A. 
363 


APPENDIXA 


THE 25-POINT PROGRAM OF THE NSDAP 


1. We demand the union of all Germans in a Greater Germany, on the basis 
of the principle of self-determination of all peoples. 


2. We demand that the German people have rights equal to those of other 
nations, and that the Peace Treaties of Versailles and St. Germaine be 
abrogated. 


3. We demand land and territory (colonies) for the maintenance of our 
people and the settlement of our surplus population. 


4. Only those who are our fellow countrymen can become citizens. Only 
those who have German blood, regardless of creed, can be our countrymen. 
Therefore no Jew can be a countryman. 


5. Those who are not citizens must live in Germany as foreigners and must 
be subject to the law of aliens. 


6. The right to choose the goverment and determine the laws of the state 
shall belong only to citizens. We therefore demand that no public office, of 
whatever nature, whether in the central government, the province, or the 
municipality, shall be held by anyone who is not a citizen. We wage war 
against the corrupt parliamentary administration whereby men are appointed 
to posts by favor of the party without regard to character and ability. 


7. We demand that the state shall above all undertake to ensure that every 
citizen shall have the possibility of living decently and earning a livelihood. 


365 


MEIN KAMPF 


If it is not possible to feed the whole population, then aliens (non-citizens) 
must be expelled from the Reich. 


8. Any further immigration of non-Germans must be prevented. We demand 
that all non-Germans who have entered Germany since 2 August 1914 shall 
be compelled to leave the Reich immediately. 


9, All citizens must possess equal rights and duties. 

10. The first duty of every citizen must be to work, mentally or physically. 
No individual shall do any work that offends against the interest of the 
community to the benefit of all. 

Therefore we demand: 

11. That all unearned income, and all interest-slavery, be abolished! 

12. Since every war imposes on the people fearful sacrifices in blood and 
treasure, all personal profit arising from the war must be regarded as treason 
to the people. We therefore demand the total confiscation of all war profits. 
13. We demand the nationalization of all trusts. 

14. We demand profit-sharing in large industries. 

15. We demand a generous increase in old-age pensions. 

16. We demand the creation and maintenance of a sound middle-class, the 
immediate communalization of large stores which will be rented cheaply 
to small businessmen, and that the strongest consideration be given to 
ensure that small businessmen shall deliver the supplies needed by the state, 
the provinces, and the municipalities. 

17. We demand agrarian reform in accordance with our national 
requirements, and the enactment of a law to expropriate the owners without 


compensation of any land needed for the common good. We demand the 
abolition of basis rents, and the prohibition of all land speculation. 


366 


APPENDIXA 


18. We demand that ruthless war be waged against those who work to the 
detriment of the common welfare. Traitors, usurers, profiteers, etc., are to 
be punished with death, regardless of creed or race. 


19. We demand that Roman law, that serves a materialist ordering of the 
world, be replaced by German common law. 


20. In order to make it possible for every capable and industrious German 
to obtain higher education, and thus the opportunity to reach into positions 
of leadership, the state must assume the responsibility of thoroughly 
organizing the entire public cultural system. The curricula of all educational 
establishments shall be adapted to practical life. The conception of the state 
idea (civics) must be taught in the schools from the very beginning. We 
demand that exceptionally talented children of poor parents, whatever their 
station or occupation, be educated at the state’s expense. 


21. The state has the duty to help raise the standard of national health by 
providing maternity welfare centers, by prohibiting juvenile labor, by 
increasing physical fitness through the introduction of compulsory games 
and gymnastics, and by the greatest possible encouragement of associations 
concemed with the physical education of the young. 


22. We demand the abolition of the regular army and the creation of a 
national folk army. 


23. We demand that there be a legal battle against those who propagate 
deliberate political lies and disseminate them through the press. In order 
to make possible the creation of a German press, we demand: 


(a) All editors and their assistants on newspapers published in the German 
language shall be German citizens. 


(b) Non-German newspapers shall only be published with the express 
permission of the state. They must not be published in the German language. 


(c) All financial interests that in any way affect German newspapers shall 
be forbidden to non-Germans by law, and we demand that the punishment 
for transgressing this law be the immediate suppression of the newspaper 
and the expulsion of the non-Germans from the Reich. 


367 


MEIN KAMPF 


(d) Newspapers transgressing against the common welfare shall be 
suppressed. We demand a legal battle against those tendencies in art and 
literature that have a disruptive influence upon the life of our people; any 
organizations that offend against the foregoing demands shall be dissolved. 


24. We demand freedom for all religious faiths in the state, insofar as they 
do not endanger its existence or offend the moral and ethical sense of the 
Germanic race. The party as such represents the point of view of a positive 
Christianity without binding itself to any one particular confession. It fights 
against the Jewish materialist spirit within and without, and is convinced 
that a lasting recovery of our people can only come about from the 
principle: Common Good before Individual Good. 


25. In order to carry out this program we demand the creation of a strong 
central authority in the state, and the unconditional authority by the political 
central parliament of the whole state and all its organizations. Also: The 
formation of professional committees and of committees representing the 
several estates of the Reich, to ensure that the laws promulgated by the 
central authority shall be carried out by the federal states. 


368 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Barnes, J. 1980. Hitler's ‘Mein Kampf’ in Britain and America. Cambridge 
University Press. 

Dalton, T. 2010. “Nietzsche and the origins of Christianity.” Online: 
<http://www.theoccidentalobserver.net> 

Dalton, T. 2011. “Eternal strangers: Anti-Jewish musings throughout history” 
(Part I). The Occidental Quarterly 11(2). Online: 
<http://www.toqonline.com/archive> 

Dalton, T. 2011b. “Eternal strangers: Anti-Jewish musings throughout history’ 
(Part II). The Occidental Quarterly 11(3). Online: 
<http://www.togonline.com/archive> 

Dalton, T. 2011c. “A most subterranean conspiracy: Nietzsche and the Judeo- 
Christian worldview.” In Nietzsche: Thoughts and Perspectives (T. 
Southgate, ed.). Black Front Press. 

Dalton, T. 2013. “The Jewish hand in the world wars” (Part I). Inconvenient 
History 5(2). Online: <http://www.inconvenienthistory.com/archive> 
Dalton, T. 2014. “The Jewish hand in the world wars” (Part II). Inconvenient 
History 6(2). Online: <http://www.inconvenienthistory.com/archive> 

Dalton, T. 2014b. “The great Holocaust mystery.” Online: 
<http://www. inconvenienthistory.com/archive.> 

Dalton, T. 2015. Debating the Holocaust (2"4 ed). Castle Hill. 

Darkmoon, L. 2014. “Pornography as a secret weapon.” Online: 
<http://www.darkmoon.me> 

Davis, M. 2012. Jews and Booze. New York University Press. 

Gertzman, J. 1999. Bookleggers and Smuthounds. University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 

Gordon, S. 1984. Hitler, Germans, and the ‘Jewish Question.’ Princeton 
University Press. 

Hitler, A. 1927/1933. Mein Kampf (E. Dugdale, trans.) Houghton Mifflin. 

Hitler, A. 1927/1939. Mein Kampf (J. Murphy, trans.) Hurst & Blackett. 

Hitler, A. 1927/1939. Mein Kampf (A. Johnson et al, trans.) Reynal & 
Hitchcock. 

Hitler, A. 1927/1939. Mein Kampf (W. Soskin, trans.) Stackpole Sons. 


% 


369 


MEIN KAMPF 


Hitler, A. 1927/1943. Mein Kampf (R. Manheim, trans.) Houghton Mifflin. 

Hitler, A. 1927/1999. Mein Kampf (R. Manheim, trans.; A. Foxman, intro.) 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Houkes, J. 2004. An Annotated Bibliography on the History of Usury. Edwin 
Mellen. 

Jacobs, J. 1992. On Socialists and ‘The Jewish Question’ after Marx. New York 
University Press. 

Joyce, A. 2015. “Jews and moneylending.” Online: 
<http://www.occidentalobserver.net> 

Kershaw, I. 1998. Hitler 1889-1936: Hubris. W. W. Norton. 

Maderthaner, W. and Silverman, L. 2009. ‘“‘Wiener Kreise’: Jewishness, politics, 
and culture in interwar Vienna.” In Interwar Vienna (Holmes and 
Silverman, eds.). Camden House. 

Maser, W. 1974. Hitler's Letters and Notes. Harper and Row. 

Mumford, L. 1966. “Technics and the nature of man.” Technology and Culture 
7: 303-317. 

Nation of Islam. 1991. The Secret Relationship between Blacks and Jews. The 
Final Call. 

Poliakov, L. 1965. The History of Anti-Semitism (3 volumes). Vanguard Press. 

Rudolf, G. 2011. Lectures on the Holocaust (2"4 ed). Barnes Review. 

Sanderson, B. 2011. “Tristan Tzara and the Jewish roots of Dada.” Online: 
<http://www.occidentalobserver.net> 

Schopenhauer, A. 1851/2010. Parerga and Paralipomena (vol. 2; E.F.J. Payne, 
trans.). Oxford University Press. 

Taeusch, C. 1942. “The concept of ‘usury’.” Journal of the History of Ideas 
3(3): 291-318. 

Twain, M. 1898. “Stirring times in Austria.” Harper s New Monthly Magazine 
(March). 

Twain, M. 1899. “Concerning the Jews.” Harpers New Monthly Magazine 
(September). 

Wistrich, R. 2012. From Ambivalence to Betrayal. University of Nebraska Press. 


Useful Websites 

www.hitlerpages.com 

www.hitler.org 
www.research.calvin.edu/german-propaganda-archive 


370 


INDEX 


Acropolis 273 
Adler, Victor 73n2, 94 
Alsace-Lorraine 278 
Alte Rosenbad tavern 234 
America 63, 164, 199 
anti-Semitism, not religious-based 
146-147 
architecture, modern decay of 271- 
274 
army, German 278-279, 284-286 
art 102-103, 266-272 
Bolshevism and 266-268, 270-271 
cubism 267 
Dadaism 267 
Aryans 174, 176, 291, 294-303, 308, 
349 
as founders of culture 294-303 
as nomads 306 
as self-sacrificing, idealistic 299- 
302 
Austerlitz, Friedrich 94 


Balkan War (1912-3) 180 

Barry, Charles 107 

Barth, Emil 216 

Bavarian Medical College 229 

Bavarian Peoples’ Party 360 

Bavarian Soviet Republic 267 

Beelitz (Germany) 208 

Belgium see Flanders, and specific 
cities 

Benedikt, Moritz 86n5 


Berlin 209 

Berlin Palace 273 

Bernstein, Eduard 218n8 

Bethmann-Hollweg, Theobald von 
281 

Bible 315 

“Big Lie” 245 

Bismarck, Otto von 46, 103, 154, 
169, 171, 178, 192, 227, 239, 248, 
276 

blood see race 

Bocklin, Arnold 271 

Boer War 180 

Bolshevism, of art 266-268, 270-271 

Braunau (Austria) 43 

Brest-Litovsk Treaty 354 

Britain see England 


Cadorna, Luigi 213 
capital 
international finance 248-249 
two types of 225, 228-229 
Caporetto, Battle of 211n3 
Catholic Church 123, 129, 136-144, 
276 
Central America 291 
Chamberlain, Houston Stewart 
174n11, 277 
Christian Socialism 88-89, 127, 145, 
147-148 
Christianity 226, 274, 276, 308, 314, 
348 


371 


MEIN KAMPF 


Christians, and Jews 317 

civil service, German 286-287 
Columbus Egg 289 

Comines (Belgium) 217 

cubism 267 

cultural decay 264, 266-274 
culture, as function of race 293-305 


Dadaism 267 

Dalton, Thomas 91n11, 218n8, 
245n3, 305n5, 308n11, 312n16 

Darkmoon, Lasha 91n12 

“Das Kapital” 229 

Davis, M. 91n12 

Dawes Plan 249n4 

democracy, critique of 107-122, 160, 
278-279 

Demosthenes 358 

“Deutschland tiber Alles” 51, 184- 
185, 215 

Deutschen Reich 354 

“Die Wacht am Rhein” 185 

Drexler, Anton 233-234, 352, 360 


Eberlbrau Keller 354 

Ebert, Friedrich 216, 269 

Edward VII, King 171 

Eisner, Kurt 218n8, 223, 230 

Ellenbogen, Wilhelm 94 

England 107, 164-169, 176, 199-203, 
280, 333 

Ephialtes 142 

Esperanto 309 

eugenics 158, 160, 264-265 


Feder, Gottfried 225, 228-229, 231- 
234 

Ferdinand, Franz 53, 122, 180 

Fichte, Johann 174n10 

Flanders 185, 208, 215-217, 220, 
278, 335 

“folkish” 357-358 


France 67-68, 88, 92, 205 

Franco-Prussian War see War of 1870 

Frederick the Great 124,228, 251, 
269, 314 

Freemasons 316-317, 322 

Frick, Wilhelm 361-362 

Friedlander, Max 86n5 


German Campaign of 1813 see Wars 
of Liberation 

German Center Party 182 

German National People’s Party 360 

German Workers’ Party (DAP) 231- 
237, 353 

Gertzman, J. 91n12 

global trade 166-168, 173 

Gobineau, Arthur de 174n11 

Goethe, Wolfgang von 110n5, 268, 
305, 314 


Haase, Hugo 218n8 
Habsburg, House of 51-54, 61, 106, 
149-150, 154-156 
Hansen, Theophil 107 
Harrer, Karl 234, 351-352, 360 
Hecateus 91n11 
Hermies (France) 208 
Herodotus 221n9 
Herzl, Theodor 86n5 
Hilferding, Rudolf 218n8 
Hitler, Adolf 
as art student 48-49, 70 
as architecture student 57-58, 70- 
71, 150 
conversion to anti-Semitism 88-97 
critique of democracy 107-122, 
160, 278-279 
DAP member #7 237 
decision to enter politics 221 
father, death of 55 
mother, death of 56, 220 
on the Big Lie 245 


372 


INDEX 


wounded in WWI, first time 207- 
208 
wounded in WWI, second time 217- 
218 
Hofsbrauhaus (am Platzl) 153, 363 
Hofsbrauhaus Keller (= Hofbraukeller 
am Weiner Platz) 351 
Hohenzollern, House of 127, 219 
Homer 59n1 
Houkes, J. 311n14 


Independent Social Democratic Party 
218n8 

internal colonization 158-162 

Islam 274 

Isonzo Front 205 

Italy 155-157, 171, 211 


Japan 180, 280, 294-295 
Jesus 308 
Jews 59, 161, 179, 197, 334, 338, 356 
anti-Semitism and 146-147 
asadisease 263 
as artful liars 96, 245 
as blood-suckers 210, 312-315 
as ‘chosen people’ 91-92, 94, 210, 
302 
as common enemy of society 357 
as ‘court Jews’ 313-315 
as democratic wire-pullers 121 
as despised throughout history 
9Inl1, 245n3 
as dialectical liars 95-96 
as eternal fungus 149 
as global agitators 171 
as ‘great master of the lie’ 245, 307, 
320, 348 
as leaders of Social Democracy 93- 
95 
as mass-murderers 327 
as moral pestilence 91 
as parasites 173-176, 305-307, 327 


373 


as pernicious bacillus 306 

as personification of devil 325 

as poisoners of the masses 91-92, 
177, 188-189, 210, 255-257, 326 

as ‘state within the state’ 174, 307, 
312 

as symbol of all evil 325 

as threat to human race 98, 349 

as world-swindlers 325 

attempts to control nature 291-293 

compulsion to lie 307 

contempt for manual laborers 319- 
321 

control of trade unions 322-324 

democracy and 286, 318, 326 

expulsions of 86n4, 306 

Freemasonry and 316-317, 322 

global finance and 172, 210, 255, 
315, 316 

gradual integration into society 310- 
327 

in Munich 210 

in November Revolution 189, 210- 
211, 218, 221, 223 

in the press, propaganda 193, 255- 
257, 278, 382, 305, 317, 322, 324- 
325, 348 

in universities 188 

in Vienna 85-86, 88-92, 109n4 

Jewish State and 304-305 

Judaism as fake religion 307-309 

lack of belief in afterlife 308 

lack of culture 304-305 

lack of idealism 303-306, 308 

marrying into royalty, nobility 258, 
313 

Marxism and 96-98, 321-326 (see 
also Marxism) 

materialism of 308 

miscegenation and 317-318, 326 

moral and cultural corruption by 86, 
93, 258, 327 


MEIN KAMPF 


Palestine/Israel and 325 
Protocols of Zionand 309-310 
racial purity of 308, 314, 317 
stench of 90 
tenacious will-to-live 302 
usury and 311-312 
Jogiches, Leo 218n8 
Joseph I, Franz 181 
Joseph II, Emperor 104-106 
Joyce, Andrew 91n12 
Judaism 317n22 
as fake religion 307-309 
Jutland, Battle of 280 


KOniggratz see Sadowa 


Lambach (Austria) 45 
land 
need for more 162-164 
productivity of 159 
Landauer, Gustav 218n8 
Landesberg, Otto 218n8 
League of Nations 254 
Liebknecht, Karl 216, 218n8 
Linz (Austria) 44, 52, 85, 89 
London 213 
Ludendorff, Erich 170, 245, 281 
Ludwig I, King 272 
Ludwig III, King 184 
Lueger, Karl 88-89, 102, 127-129, 
147, 195 
Luther, Martin 228 
Luxemburg, Rosa 216n7, 218n8 


Maderthaner, W. 94n13 
Manchester Liberalism 123, 146 
Marne river 205 
marriage 261-262 
Marxism 59, 74 
democracy as forerunner of 110 
German attitudes toward 177-178, 


188, 192-193, 231-232, 329, 341, 353 


international finance and 248-249 
Jews and 96-98, 321-326 
Karl Marx and 229 
materialism, as a vice 247-248 
Maximilian, Emperor 123-124 
Mecca 345 
Moltke, Helmuth von 197 
Muehsam, Erich 218n8 
Mumford, Lewis 298n4 
Munich 
as center of NSDAP 345-346 
culture of 153-154, 272 
Hitlerin 180, 223-224, 230 
Jews in 209-211 
November Revolution and 219 
rise of NSDAP and 350-351 
mustard gas 217-218 


Napoleon III 124 
Nation of Islam 91n12 
National Socialist German Workers’ 
Party (NSDAP) 358 
doctrine of People and Fatherland 229 
platform 362-363, Appendix A 
nationalism, German 336-342 
navy, German 168, 218-219, 279-281 
Negro 103, 326 
Nicholas II, Czar 213 
Niederwald Statue 185 
Nietzsche, Friedrich 320n24 
nomadic way of life 305-306 
Nordau, Max 86n5 
North America 291 
November Revolution (1918) 169, 
205-221, 335, 363 


Odeon 153 
Oktoberfest 153 
opera 55,57,59 
Ostmark 49-50, 163 
Oxenstierna, Axel 277 


374 


INDEX 


Palestine/Israel 325 

Palm, Johannes 43 

Pan-Germanism 123, 126-127, 130- 
148 

Pantheon 273 

Paris 205, 213, 239 

parliamentarianism 107-110, 113-122, 
342-343 

Parthenon 270 

Parvus, Alexander 218n8 

Pasewalk (Germany) 218 

Passau (Germany) 44 

Pericles 113, 270 

Philostratus 213n16 

Pinakothek 153 

plague 246 

Pétsch, Leopold 52-53 

PGhner, Ernst 361-362 

population control 157-164 

Prague 155 

press, as a great power 252-257 

Jewish role in see Jews, in the press 
Viennese 86-88, 92 

propaganda 195-207, 282, 340-342 

prostitution 261-265 

“Protocols of the Elders of Zion” 309- 
310 

Protestantism 140 


race 
culture and 293-305 
importance of 259, 262-264, 289- 
330, 338 

Radek, Karl 218n8 

religion, social role of 274-276 

Repington, Charles 244 

Revolution, German (1918) see 
November Revolution 

Rhine river 185 

Roman Senate, ancient 244 

Rome 273, 345 

Russia 167, 180, 211, 213, 327 


Russian Revolution 211 
Russo-Japanese War (1904-5) 180 


Sadowa (Sadova) 124 

Sanderson, Brenton 267n6 

Sanssouci Palace 269 

Scheidemann, Philipp 216 

Schiller, Friedrich 174, 268, 297-298 

Schlageter, Leo 44 

Schmiedt, Ernst 223 

Schoénerer, George von 127-130, 137 

Schopenhauer, Arthur 90, 245, 307 

Schwabing (Munich) 197 

Serbia 183 

Severing, Carl 44 

Shakespeare, William 268 

Siegfried (mythology) 172, 261, 363 

Sieghart, Rudolf 86n5 

Skagerrak, Battle of 280 

Slovenia 205n1, 211n3 

Social Democracy 73-84, 93-95, 108, 
192-193, 341 

soil see land 

Somme, Battle of 208, 216 

South America 291 

South Tyrol 213 

Star of David 329 

Sternecker Brewery 232, 234 

Stinnes, Hugo 249 

Stiirgkh, Karl von 94n13 

syphilis 257-265 


Tacitus 91n11, 245n3 

Talmud 308 

Tannenberg, Battle of 213 

Theresa, Maria 181 

Third Reich 239n1 

Toller, Ernst 218n8 

Traunstein (Germany) 223 

Triple Alliance 155-156, 169-171, 
178 

tuberculosis 246 


375 


MEIN KAMPF 


Turkey 171 War of 1870 124 

Twain, Mark 109n4 Wars of Liberation 179, 271 
Wervick (Belgium) 218 

unions (trade) 80-84, 322-324, 336 Wetterlé, Emile 278 

United Kingdom see England Wilhelm I, Kaiser 185n7, 251 

United States of America see America Wilhelm II, Kaiser 87-88, 206, 221, 248 
Wilson, Woodrow 292 

Versailles Treaty 284, 335, 354 Wittelsbach, House of 154, 219 

von Schwind, Moritz 271 
Ypres 216-217 

Wagner, Richard 55, 228 

War of 1866 123 Zionism 90, 325 


376 








