STATE AND REVOLUTION 


BURMON PUBLISHING HOUSE 
72, HARRISON ROAD :: CALCUTTA. 


Published by 
Brajabihari Burmon 
Burmon Publishing House 
72, Harrison Road, Calcutta. 


"Í Indian 2nd Edition | 


Printed by 
Gopal C. Basak 
Popular Printing Works 
1/ S ] 47, Madhu Roy Lane, Calcutta. 


PREFACE 


THE question of the State is acquiring at the present a particu- 
lar importance, both theoretical and practical. 

The Imperialist war has greatly accelerated and intensified 
the transformation of monopolist capitalism into State-monopoly 
Capitalism. The monstrous oppression of the labouring 
masses by the State—which is identifying itself more and more 
intimately with the all-powerful capitalist combines—is become- 
ing ever more terrible. The foremost... countries are being 
converted—we speak here of their “rear’—intomilitary labour 
prisons for the workers. : l 

The incredible miseries and horrors of the protracted war 
are making the position of the masses unbearable and inerea- 
sing their indignation. 

It is clear an international proletarian revolution is 
preparing. 

The question therefore of its relations to the State is 
acquiring a practical importance. 

The accumulation of opportunist elements during the 
decades of comparatively peaceful development has created 
a predominance of Socialist Chauvinism in the official Socialist 
parties of the whole world : Plekhanoff, Potresoff, Breshkovs- 
kaya, Rubanovitch, and, in a slightly concealed form, Tseretelli, 
Tchernoff and Co. in Russia; Scheidemann, Legien, David 
and others in Germany; Renaudel, Guesde, Vandervelde in 
France and belgium; Hyndman and the Fabians in England ; 
and so on, and soon. Socialist in words, Chauvinist in deeds, 
these “leaders of Socialism” distinguish themselves by a base, 
servile’ adaptation to the interests not only of “their” national 
bourgeoisie, but also of “their? State—for plenty of smaller, 
weaker nationalities have long since been exploited and enslaved 
by most of the so-called Great Powers. The Imperialist war is 


ji 
just a ourauwiv sva uid division and re-partition of the same 
kind of booty. 

The struggle for the emancipation of the labouriug masses 
from the oppression of the bourgeoisie in general, and the 
Imperialist bourgeoisie in particular, cannot be separated from a 
struggle against the opportunist superstitions concerning the 
State. l 

We, first of all, survey the teachings of marx and Engels 
on the State, dwelling particularly fully on the forgotten parts, 
and on those aspects of their teachings which the opportunists 
have distorted. We then analyse specially the chief representa- 
tive of these pervertors, Karl Kautsky (1889-1914), who has 
suffered such a pitiful political bankruptcy during the present 
war. Finally, we bring forward the most important results of 
the experiences of the Russian revolutions of 1905, and particu- 
larly of 1917. 

This last revolution is evidently completing at the present 
time (beginning of Angust, 1917) the first stage of its develop- 
ment ; but in general the whole of this revolution can only be 
looked upon as a link in the chain of Socialist proletarian 
revolutions which will result from the imperialist war. 

The question of the relation ofa proletarian Socialist re- 
volution to the State is, therefore, not only of practical political 
importance, but is an urgentneed of the day, being concerned 
with the elucidation for the masses of what they will have to do 
for their liberation from the yoke of Capitalism in the very 
near future. 

THE AUTHOR, 
August, 1917, 


-~AFTERWORD. 


- This little book was written in August and September, 

1917. I had already drawn up the plan for the next, 
the seventh chapter, on the experiences of the Russian 
Revolutions of 1905 and 1917. But apart from the 
title, I had rot succeeded in writing a single line of 
the chapter, being prevented therefrom by a political 
crisis—the eve of the November Revolution of 1917. 
Such a hindrance can only be welcomed, However, 
this final part of the book devoted to the lessons of the 
Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917, will probably 
have to be put off for a longtime. It is more pleasant 
and more useful to live through the experience of a 
revolution than to write about it. 


Petrograd, | —THE AUTHOR. 
(Nov. 30th) Dec. 12th, 1917 


adh ae ad ad 


Cx. 


ANA Ob t 


CH. 


CONTENTS. 
PREFACE 
AFTERWORD 
I—Ciass SOCIETY AND THE STATE. 
The State as the product of the areconetapniy of Class 


antagonisms . 
The Special Bodies of Armed Men, Prisons, etc. 


The State as an Instrument of Exploitation of the Oppressed 


Class 


The Withering Away of the State and Revolution by Force 


Il—Tue Experience oF 1848-51. 


The Eve of Revolution as 
The Results of Revolution te 
The Formulation of the Question by Marx in 1852 


Ili—Twse Experience or Paris COMMUNE OF 
1871 : Marx’s ANALYSIS. 


In what lay the Heroism of the Communards ? 
What is to replace the Machinery of State ? 

The Destruction of Parliamentarism ee 
The Organisation of the Unity of the Nation ... 


, The Destruction of the Parasite-State 


IV ——CONTINUATION. SUPPLEMENTARY ae 
NATIONS BY ENGELS. 


The Housing Question 

The Dispute with the Anarchists 

The Latter to Bebel P 
Criticism of the Draft of the Erfurt Programme 

The Preface of 1891 to Marx’s “Civil War in France” 
Engels on the Suppression of Democracy ii 


V—Tae Economrc FOUNDATION OF THE 
WITHERING AWAY OF THE STATE. 


The Formulation of the Question by Marx 

The Transition from Capitalism to Communism 
The First Phase of Communist Society 

The Highest Phase of Communist Society 


VI—TuHe VULGARISATION OF MARX BY THE 
OPPORTUNISTS. 
The Controversy between Plekhanoff and the Anarchists 


Kautsky’s Controversy with the Opportunists ... 
The Debate between Kautsky and Pannekoek . 


THE STATE & REVOLUTION 


CHAPTER I 


CLASS SOCIETY AMD THE STATE. 


4. The Statetas the Product of the [rreconcil- 
ability of Class Antagonisms. 


Mars’s doctrines are now undergoing the same fate, which, 
more than ounce in the course of history, nas befallen the 
doctrines of other revolutionary thinkers and leaders ot oppres- 
sed classes struggling fo porsia DAN dehe lifetime of 
great revolution: ariel) corrvessing he aes have invariably 
meted out to them relentless persecution, and received their 
teaching with the most savage hostiiity, most furious hatred, 
and a ruthless campaign of lies aud slanders. Aiter their death, 
however, attempts are usually made to turn them into harmless 
saints, canonising them, as it were, and investing their name 
with a certain halo by way of “consolation” to the oppressed 
classes, and with the object of duping them ; while at the same 
time emasculating and vulgarising the real essence of their re- 
volutionary theories and blunting their revolutionary edge. At 
the present time the brougeoisie and the opportunists within 
the Labour movement are co-operating in this work of adultera- 
ting Marxism. They omit, obliterate, and distort the revolu- 
tionary side of its teaching, its revolutionary soul,and push to 
the foreground and extol what is, or seems, acceptable to the 
bourgeoisie. All the Socialist Chauvinists are now “Marxists” 
—gave the mark! And more and more do German bourgeois 
professors, erstwhile specialists in the demolition of Marx, speak 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 


J 


now of the “National-German” Marx, who, forsooth, has educa- 
ted the splendidly organised working class for the present pre- 
datory war. 

In these circumstances, when the distortion of Marxism is so 
widespread, our first task is to resuscitate the real nature of 
Marx’s teaching on the subject of the State. For this purpose 
it will be necessary to quote copiously from the works of Marx 
and Engels themselves. Of course. long extracts will make our 
text cumbersome and will in no way add to its lucidity ; but we 
"cannot possibly avoid them. All, or at any rate, all the most 
essential passages in the works of Marx and Engels on the sub- 
ject of the State must be given as fully as possible, in order that 
the reader may form an independent and complete view of the 
ideas of the founders of scientific Socialism and their develop- 
ment, andin order that their distortions by the present predo- 
minant Kautsky school may be proved in black and white and 
rendered plain to all. 

Let us begin with the most popular of Engels’ works, “The 
Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State,” the 
sixth edition of which was published in Stuttgart as far 
back as 1894. Summarising his historical analysis Engels 
says : 

“The State in no way constitutes a force imposed on Society 
from outside. Nor is the State ‘the reality of the Moral Idea, 
‘the image and reality of Reason’ as Hegel asserted. The State is 
the product of Society at a certain stage ofits development. 
The State is tantamount to an acknowledgment that the given 
society has become entangled in an insoluble contradiction with 
itself, that it has broken up into irreconcilable antagonisms, of 
which it is powerless to rid itself. And in order that these anta- 
gonisms, these classes with their opposing economic interests 
may not devour one another and Society itself in their sterile 
struggle, some force standing, seemingly, above Society, becomés 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 9 


necessary so as to moderate the force of their collisions and to 
keep them within the bounds of ‘order’. And this force arising 
trom Society, but placing itself above it, which gradually separa- 
tes itself from it—this force is the State.”—/ mae 117-118 of 
6th German Edition.) 

Here, we have, expressed in allits clearness, the basic idea 
of Marxism on the question of the historical role and meaning 
of the State. The State is the product and the manifestation of 
the irreconcilability of class antagonisms. When, where and to 
what extent the State arises, depends directly on when, where 
and to what extent the class antagonisms of a given society 
cannot be objectively reconciled. And, conversely, the exis- 
tence of the State proves that the class antagonisms are irre- 
concilable. 

It is precisely on this most important and fundamental Joi 
that distortions of Marxism arise along two main lines. 

On the one hand, the middle class (bourgeois) and particu- 
larly the lower middle class (petty bourgeois), ideologists, com- 
pelled by the pressure of indisputable historical facts to 
recognise that the State only exists where there are class anta- 
gonisms and class struggles, “correct” Marx in such a way as to 
make it appear that the State is an organ for the reconciliation 
of classes. According to Marx, the State can neither arise nor 
maintain itself if a reconciliation of classes is possible. But 
with the middle class and philistine professors and publicists the 
State, (and this frequently on the strength of benevolent refer- 
ences to Marx) becomes a mediator and conciliator of classes, 
According to Marx, the State is the organ of class domination, 
the organ of oppression of one class by another. Its aim is the 
creation of order which legalises and perpetuates this oppression 
by moderating the collisions between the classes. But in the 
opinion of the lower middle class politicians, the establishment 
of order is equivalent to the reconciliation of classes, and not to 


16 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the oppression of one class by another. To moderate their 
collisions does not mean, according to them, to deprive the 
oppressed class of certain definite means and methods in its 
struggle for throwing off the yoke of the oppressors, but to con- 
ciliate it. 

For instance, when, in the Revolution of 1917, the question 
of the rea] meaning and role of the State arose, in all its import- 
ance, as a practical question demanding immediate action on a 
wide mass scale, all the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshe- 
viks rattled down, suddenly and without reservation, to the 
lower middle class theory of the “conciliation of classes by the 
State.” Innumerable resolutions and articles by publicists of 
both these parties were saturated through and through with this 
purely middle ciass and philistine theory. of conciliation. That 
the State is the organ of domination of a definite class which 
cannot be reconciled to its social antipodes—this the lower 
middle class democracy is never able to understand. Their 
attitude towards the State is one of the mosttelling proofs that 
our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are not Socialists 
at all (which we, Bolsheviks, have always maintained), but only 
lower middle class democrats with a phraseology very nearly 
Socialist. 

On the other hand, the distortion of Marx by the Kautsky 
school is far more subtle. “Theoretically,” there is no denial 
that the State is the organ of class domination, or that the class 
antagonisms are irreconcilable. But what is forgotten or over- 
looked is this :—If the State is the product of the irreconcilable 
character of class antagonisms, if it is a force standing above 
society and “separating itself gradually from it,” then it is clear 
that the liberation of the oppressed class is impossible without a 
violent revolution, and without the destruction of the machinery 
of State power, which ħas been created by the governing class 
and in which this “separatioti” is embodied. This inference, 


STATE AND REVOLUTION il 


theoretically quite self-evident, was drawn by Marx, as we shall 
see later with the greatest precision from a concrete historical 
analysis of the problems of Revolution. And itis exactly this 
inference which Kautsky—we shall show this fully in our sub- 
sequent remarks—has “forgotten” and distorted. 


2. The Special Bodies of Armed Men, Prisons, etc. 

Engels continues :— 

“As compared with the ancient gentilic (tribal or clan) 
organisation, the State in distinguished, first of all, by the 
grouping of the subjects of the State according to territorial 
divisions.” 

Such a grouping seems “natural” to us, but it came after a 
prolonged and costly struggle against the old form of tribal, 
gentilic Society. 

“The second distinguishing feature is the establishment 
of a public power which is no longer identical with the popu- 
lation and which is organised as an armed force. 

“This distinct public power is necessary, because a selt- 
acting armed organisation of the population has become im- 
possible with the break up of Society into classes.... This 
public authority exists inevery State. It consists not only 
of armed men, but also of material additions in the shape of 
prisons and repressive institutions of al! kinds which were 
unknown in the gentilic (clan) form of Society.” 


Engels develops the conception of that “force” which is ter- 
med the State—a force arising from Society, but placing itself 
above it and becoming more and more divorced fromit. What 
does this force consists of, in the main? It consists of special 
bodies of armed men who have at their command prisons, ete. 

We are justified in speaking of special bodies of armed men, 
because the public power peculiar to every State “is not identi- 


PER E EPS Sah: ed eee Veas 2k ole Ben FIO eee be | 


12 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


organisation.” Like all revolutionary thinkers, Engels tries.to 
draw the attention of the class-conscious workers to that very 
fact which to prevailing philistinism appears least of all worthy 
of attention, most common and sanctified by soild, indeed, one 
might say, petrified prejudices. A standing army and police are 
the ‘chief instruments of force of the State authority : but can 
it, then, be otherwise ? . 

From the point of view of the vast majority of Europeans 
at the end of the 19th century to whom Engels addressed him- 
self and who had neither lived through nor observed at close 
quarters a single important revolution, this could not be other- 
wise. They could not understand what was meant by this 
“self-acting armed organisation of the popalation.” 

To the question, whence arose the necessity for forming 
special bodies of armed men (police and standing army) standing 
above Society and becoming divorced from it, the Western 
European and Russian philistines are inclined to answer with 
with a few phrases, borrowed from Spencer, about the com- 
plexity of social life, the differentiation of functions and so 
forth. 

Such a reference seems “scientific” and effectively dulls 
the senses of the average man, obscuring the most important 
and basic fact, viz : the break up of Society into irreconcilably 
antagonistic classes. Without such a split the “self-acting armed 
organisation of the population” might have differed from the 
primitive organisation of a herd of monkeys merely grasping 
sticks, or of primitive man, or races united in a clan form of 
society, by its complexity, its high technique, and so forth, but 
would still have been possible. It cannot, however, exist now, 
because Society, in the period of civilisation, is broken up into 
antagonistic and, indeed, irreconcilably antagonistic classes, 
the “self-acting” arming of which would lead to armed struggles. 
between them. The State is, therefore, formed, a special force 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 13 


is created in the form of special bodies of armed men, and every 
revoluticn, in shattering the State machinery, demonstrates 
to us how the governing class aims at the restoration of the 
special bodies of armed men at its service, and how the oppres- 
sed class tries to create a new organisation of a similar nature, 
capable of serving not the exploiting, but the exploited class. ` 

In the above discussion, Engels poses theoretically the very 
same question which is presented to usin a practical, palpable 
form, on a mass scale, by every great revolution, viz: the ques- 
tion of the relation between “special bodies of armed men” and 
the ‘“self-acting armed organisation of the population.” We 
shall see how this question is illustrated concretely by the 
experience of the European and Russian revolutions. 

But let us return to Engels. 

He points out that sometimes (for instance, here and there 
in North America) this public power is weak (he has in mind 
here rare exceptions in capitalist society and parts of North 
America in its pre-Imperialist days, where the free colonist 
predominated), but that in general, it tends to become 
stronger :— 

“The above-mentioned public force increases with the 
intensification of class antagonisms within the State, and with 
the growth in size and population of the adjacent States. One 
has but to glance at present-day Europe in which the class 
struggle and rivalry in conquests have screwed up that public 
force to such a pitch that it threatens to swallow up the whole 
of Society and even the State itself...” 

This was written as far back as the beginning of the ’nineties 
of last century, Engels’ last Preface being dated June 16th, 
1891. The turn towards Imperialism, in the shape both ofa 
complete domination of the trusts and of the all-powerful large 
banks, and of a colonial policy on a grand scale and so forth, 
had only just begun in France, and was even weaker in North 


14 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


America and in Germany. Since then the “rivalry in conquests,” 
has made gigantic advances—especially as, by the beginning of 
the second decade of the 20th century, the whole world had 
been finally divided up between these “rival conquerors”, that 
is, between the great predatory Powers. Military and naval 
armaments then grew to monstrous proportions, and the preda- 
tory war of 1914-17 for the domination of the world by England 
or Germany, for the division of the spoils, bids fair to bring 
about “the swallowing up” of all the forces of society by the 
rapacious State power, and lead to a complete catastrophe. 

Already in 1891 Engels was able to point to ‘rivalry in 
conquests” as one of the most important features of the foreign 
policy of the Great Powers but in 1914-1917, when this rivalry, 
many times intensified. had given birth to an Imperialist war, 
the rascally Social-Chauvinists cover up their defence of the 
policy of grab of “their” capitalist classes by phrases about the 
“defence of the Fatherland,” or “the defence of the Republic 
and the Revolution” and so on, and so on! 


3. The State as an Instrument of Exploitation of the 
Oppressed Class. 


For the maintenance of a special public force standing above 
society, taxes and State loans are indispensable. 

“Wielding public power and the right to exact taxes, 
the officials | Engels writes ] are raised as organs of society, 
above society. The free, voluntary respect enjoyed by the 
organs of the tribal (clan) society is no longer sufficient „for 
them, even could they win it.” 

Special laws are enacted regarding the sanctity and the 
inviolability of the officials. “The most insignificant police 
servant” has more authority than the representative of the clan, 
but even the head of a civilised State might well envy the Elder 


STATE AND REVOLUTION hi 


Ot 


of.a clan in respect of the “spontaneous, unforced regard on the 
part of society” enjoyed by that Elder. 

Here is the question raised of the privileged position of the 
officials as organs of the State power, and the fundamental 
problem that has to be answered isthis: What is it that places 
them above society ? We shall see how this theoretical problem 
was solved practically by the Paris Commune in 1871 and how 
it was slurred over in a reactionary manner in 1412 by Kautsky. 

“Since the State arose ont of the need of keeping in check 
the antagonisms of classes; since at the same time it arose as 
a result of the collisions of these classes, it is, as a general rule, 
the State of the most powerful. and economically predominant 
class, which by means of iie State also becomes the predominant 
class politically, thereby obtaining new means for the oppression 
and exploitation of the oppressed class.” 

It was not only the ancient and feudal States which were 
orgaus of exploitation of the slaves and serfs, but the 

“modern representative State, too, is the means of ex- 
ploitation of wage labour by capital. By way of excep- 
tions, however, there are periods when the warring 
classes attain such an equilibrium of strength that the State 
power for a time becomes, to an extent, independent of both 
classes and appears as a mediator between them....” 

Such, for instance, were the absolute monarchies of the 
iith and 18th centuries, the Bonapartism of the First and 
. Third Empires in France, and the Bismarck regime in 
Germany. . 

Such, we may add, is now the Kerensky Government in 
Republican Russia after it has initiated the persecution of 
the revolutionary proletariat, at a moment when the Soviets, 
thanks to the leadership of the lower middle class democrats, 
have already become irapotent whilst the capitalist class is not 
yet strong enough to dissolve them. 


15 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


“In a democratic Republic [ Engels continues | wealth uses 
its power indirectly, but so much the more effectively, first, 
by means of direct bribery of officials [as in America]; 
second, by means of an alliance between the Government 
and the Stock Exchange” [ as in France and America |, 

At the present time, Imperialism and the domination of the 
banks have reduced to a fine art both these methods of 
defending and practically asserting the omnipotence of wealth 
in democratic Republics of all descriptions. If, for instance, 
in the very first months ofthe Russian Democratic Republic— 
one might say during the honeymoon of the union of the 
“Socialist”-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bour- 
geoisie in the Coalition Ministry, M. Paltchinski obstructed 
every measure of restraint against the capitalists and war- 
profiteering, or the plunder of the public treasury by army 
contractors; and if, after his resignation, M. Paltchinski 
( replaced, of course, by an exactly similar Paltchinski ) was 
“rewarded” by the capitalists with a “cushy” little job carrying 
a salary.of 120,000 roubles (£ 12,000) per annum, what was this ? 
Direct or indirect bribery ? A league of the Government with 
the capitalist syndicates, or “only’’ friendly relations ? What 
is the precise role played by Tchernoff. Tscretelli, Avksentieft’ 
and Skobeleff ? Are they the “direct,” or “only” the indirect 
allies of the millionaire thieves who are plundering the public 
treasury ? The omnipotence of “wealth” is also more “secure” 
in a democratic republic, because it does not depend on the bad 
political form of capitalism. The democratic ,republic is the 
best possible political form for capitalism, and, therefore, once 
capital has gained control (through the Paltchinskis, Tchernoffs, 
Tseretellis an:i Co.) of this very best form, it establishes its 
power so securely, so firmly that no change of persons, or 
institutions or parties, in the bourgeois republic can shake it. 

We must also note that Engels quite definitely regards. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 17 


universal suffrage as a means of capitalist domination. Univer- 
sal suffrage, he says (summing up obviously the lone experience 
of German Social-Democracy), is “an index of the maturity 
of the working class; it cannot and never will, give anything 
more in the present state.” The lower middle class democrats 
such as our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks and also 
their twin brothers, the Social-Chauvinists and opportunists of 
Western Europe, all expect a “great deal” from this universal 
suffrage. They themselves think and instil into the minds 
of the people the wrong idea that universal suffrage in the 
“present state” is really capable of expressing the will of 
the majority of the labouring masses and of securing its 
realisation. 

Here we can only note this wrong idea, and point out that 
this perfectly clear, exact and concrete statement by Engels 
is distorted at every step in the propaganda and agitation 
of the “official” (that is, opportunist ) Sncialist parties. A 
detailed exposure of all the falseness of this idea, which Engels 
simply brushes aside, is given in our further acccount of the 
views of Marx and Engels on the “modern” State. 

A general summary of his views is given by Engels in the 
most popular of his works in the following words :— 

“Thus, the State has not always existed. There were 
societies which did without it, which has no idea of the State 
or of State power. Ata given stage of economic development 
which was necessarily bouud up with the break up of society 
into classes, the State becamea necessity, as a result of this 
division. We are now repidly approaching a stage in the 
development of production, in which the existence of these 
classes is not only no longer necessary, but is becoming 
a direct impediment to production. Classes will vanish as. 
inevitably as they inevitably arose in the past. With the 
disappearance of classes the State, too, will inevitably disappear. 


18 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


When organising production anew on the basisof a free 
and equal association of the producers, Society will banish the 
whole State machine to a place which will then be the 
most proper one for it—to the museum of antiquities side by 
side with the spinning-wheel and the bronze axe.” 

It is not often that we find this passage quoted in the propa- 
gandist literature of contemporary Social-Democracy. But even 
when we do come across it, it is generally quoted as some 
sacred or ritual formula, that is, merely to show official respect 
for Engels, without any attempt to gauge the width and the 
depth of the revolutionary act pre-supposed by this “banish- 
ment of the whole State machine to the museum of antiquities”. 
And often one cannot even trace the least comprehension of 
what Engels calls the State machine. 


4. The Withering Away of the State and 


Revolution by Force 


Engels’ words regarding the “withering away” of the State 
enjoy sucha popularity, are so often quoted, and reveal so 
clearly the essence of the common adulteration of Marxism 
in an opportunist sense that we must examine them in 
detail. Let us give the whole argument from which they 
are taken. 

“The proletariat takes control of the State authority and, 
first of all, conyerts the means of production into State 
property. But by this very act it destroys itself, as a 
proletariat, destroying at the same time all class differences 
and class antagonisms, and with this, also, the State. Past 
and present Society, which moved amidst class antagonisms, 
had to have the State, that is, an organisation of the exploiting 
class for. the support of its external conditions of produc- 
tion, therefore, in particular, for the forcible retention 
of the exploited class in such conditions of oppression 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 14 


( such as slavery, verfdom, wage-labour }, as are determined 
by. the given methods of production. The State was 
the official representative of the whole of Society, its embodiment 
in a visible corporation ; but it was only in so far as it was the 
State of that class which, in the given epoch, alone represented 
the whole of society. In ancient times it was the State of the 
slave-owners—the onl, citizens of the State ; in the middle ages 
it was the State of the feudal nobility: in our own times 
it is the State of the capitalists. When, ultimately, the State 
really becomes the representative of the whole of society, it 
will make itself superfluous. From the time when, together 
with class domination and the struggle for individual! existence, 
resulting from the present anarchy in production, those cofiwis 
and excesses whica arise from this struggle wil! all disappear— 
from that time there will, therefore. be no need for the State. 
The first act of the State, in which it reallv acts as the 
representative of the whole of Society, namely the assumption 
of control over the means of production on behalf of society, is 
also its last independent act aS a State. The interference of 
authority of the State with social relations will then become 
superfluous in one field after another, and finally will cease of 
itself. The anthority of the Government over persons will be 
replaced by the administration of things and the direction of 
the processes of production. The State will not be “abolished” ; 
it will wither away. It is from this point of view that we must 
appraise the phrase, “a free popular State’—a phrase which, 
fora time, had a right to be employed as a purely propaganda 
slogan, but which in the long run is scientifically untenable. It 
is also from this point of view that we must appraise the demand 
of the so-called anarchists that the State ‘should be abolished 
overnight.” —Herr Eugen Duhrings “Umwalzung der Wissens- 
chaft,” pp. 802-303, 3rd German Edition. 


Without fear of committing an error it can be said that 


20 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the only point in this argument by Engels so singularly rich in 
ideas which has become an integral part of Socialist thought 
among modern Socialist parties has been that, according to 
Marx, the State “withers away” in contradiction to the 
Anarchist teaching of the “abolition” of the State. To 
emasculate Marxism in such a manner is simply to reduce it 
to opportunism, for such an “interpretation” only leaves the 
semi-articulate conception of a slow, even, continuous change, 
free from leaps and storms, free from revolution. The current 
popular conception, if one may say so, of the “withering 
away” of the State undoubtedly means a quenching, if not 
negation, of revolution. Yet, such an “interpretation” is a 
most vulgar distortion of Marxism, advantageous only to the 
capitalist classes and based theoretically on the neglect of the 
most important conditions and considerations pointed out in the 
very passage summarising Engels’ ideas, which we have just 
quoted in full. 

In the first place, at the very outset of his argument, Engels 
says that in assuming State power, the proletariat “by that 
very act destroys the State as such.” It is not the custom to 
reflect on what this really means. Generally, it is either ignored 
altogether or it is considered as a piece of “Hegelian weakness” 
on Engels’ part. Asa matter of fact, however, these words 
express succinctly the experience of one of the greatest prole- 
tarian revolutions—the Paris Commune of 1871, of which we 
shall apeak in greater detail in its own place. In reality, Engels 
speaks here of the destruction of the capitalist State by the 
proletarian revolution, while the words about its withering 
away refer to the remains of a proletarian Stute after the 
Socialist revolution. The capitalist State does not wither away, 
according to Engels, but is destroyed by the proletariat in the 
course of the revolution. Only the proletarian State or semi- 
State withers away after the revolution. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 2l 


Second, the State is a “particular power of suppression.” 
This splendid aud extremely profound definition of Engels is 
giyen by him here with complete lucidity. It follows therefrom 
that the “particular power of suppression” of the proletariat by 
the capitalist class of the millions of workers by a handful of 
rich, must be replaced by a “particular power of suppression” 
on the capitalist class by the proletariat (the dictatorship of the 
proletariat. It is just this that constitutes the destruction of 
the State as such. Itis just this that constitutes the “act” of 
taking possession of the means of production on behalf of 
Society. And itis obvious that such a substitution of one 
{capitalist) “particular power” by another (proletarian) “parti- 
cular power” could in no way take place in the form of a 
“withering away.” 

Third, in using the term, “withering away,” Engels refers 
quite clearly and definitely to the period after “the taking over 
of the means of production by the State on behalf of the whole 
of society,” that is, after the Socialist Revolution. We all 
know that the proletarian form of the “State” is than an abso- 
lutely complete democracy. But it never enters the head of 
any of the opportunists who shamelessly distort Marx that 
Engels deals here with the withering away of the democracy. 
At first sight this seems very strange. But it will only be 
unintelligible to one who has not reflected on the fact that 
democracy is also a State and that, consequently, democracy 
will also disappear when the State disappears. Only a revolu- 
tion “destroy” the capitalist State. The State in general, that 
is, most complete democracy, can only wither away. 

Fourth, having formulated his famous proposition that “the 


State withers away,” Engels at once explains concretely that 
this proposition is directed equally against the opportunists and 
and the anarchists. In doing this, however, Engels draws, in 
the first place, that deduction from his proposition, which is 
directed against the opportunists. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 


t9 
i) 


One can wager that out of every ten thousand persons who 
have read or heard of the “withering away” of the State, 9,990 
do not know at all, or do not remember that Engels did not 
direct his conclusions from this proposition against the anar- 
chists alone. And out of the remaining ten, nine do not know 
the meaning of a “free popular State” nor the reason why an 
attack on this watchword contains an attack on the opportunists. 
This is how history is written! This is how a great revolu- 
tionary doctrine is imperceptibly adulterated and adapted to 
current philistinism ! The reference to the anarchists has been 
repeated thousands of times, has been vulgarised in the crudest 
fashion possible until it has acquired the strength of a prejudice, 
whereas the reference to the opportunists has been hushed up 
and “forgotten.” 


“A free popular State” was the demand and current watch- 
word in the programme of the German Social-Democrats of the 
seventies. ‘There is no political substance in this watchword 
other than a pompous middle class circumlocution of the idea 
of democracy. Insc tar asit point-d in “lawful” manner at a 
democratic republic, Engels was prepared “for a time” to 
justify it from a propaganda point of view. But this watch- 
word was really opportunist, for it not only took an exaggera- 
ted view of the attractiveness of, bourgeois democracy, but 
also implied a lack of understanding of tne Socialist criticism 
of the State in general. We are in favour of a democratic 
republic as the best form of the State for the proletariat under 
capitalism, but we have no right to forget that wage slavery 
is the lot of the people even in the most democratic middle 
class republic. Furthermore, every State is a “particular power 
of suppression” of the oppressed class. Consequently, no State 
is either “free” or “popular.” Marx aud Engels explained this 
repeatedly to their party comrades in the seventies. 

_ Fifth, in the same work of Engels, from which every one 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 23 


reme:nbers his argument on “withering away” of the State, 
there is also a disquisition on the nature of a violent revolution ; 
and the historical appreciation of, its role becomes, with Engels, 
a veritable panegyric of a revolution by force. This, of course, 
no one remembers. To talk or even to think of the importance 
of this idea, is not considered respectable by our modern 
Socialist parties, and in the daily propaganda and agitation 
among the masses it plays no part whatever. Yet it is indis- 
solubly bound up with the “withering away” of the State in 
one harmonious whole. Here is Engels’ argument : 

“That force also plays another part in history (other than 
that of a perpetuation of evil), namely, a. revolutionary part: 
that, as Marx says, it is the midwile of every old society when 
it is pregnant with a new one ; that force is the instrament and 
the means by which social movements hack their way through 
and break up the dead and fossilised political, forms—of all this 
not a word by Herr Duhring. Duly, with sighs and groans, 
does he admit the possibility that for the overthrow of the 
system of exploitation force may, perhaps, be necessary, but 
most unfortunate if you please, because all use of force, forsooth, 
demoralises its user! And this is said in face of the great 
moral and intellectual advance which has been the result of 
every victorious revolution! And this is said in Germany 
where a violent collision—which might perhaps be forced on 
the people—should have, at the very least, this advantage that 
ait would destroy the spirit of subservience which has been 
permeating the national mind ever since the degradation ‘and 
humiliation of the Thirty Years’ War. And this turbid, flabby, 
impotent, parson’s mode of thinking dares offer itself for 
acceptance to the most “revolutionary party history has ever 
known !” (p. 193, 3rd German Edition.) 

How can this eulogy of a revolution by force, which Engels 
used to propound to the German Social-Democrats between 


24 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


1878-94, that is, up to the very day of his death, be reconciled 
with the theory of the “withering away” of the State, and com- 
bined into one doctrine? Usually the two views are combined by a 
process of eclecticism, by an unprincipled, sophistic, arbitrary 
selection sometimes of passages here and there (to oblige the 
powers that be)—and in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred (if not 
more often), it is the idea of the withering away of the State that is 
specially emphasised. Dialectics is replaced by eclectics—this 
isthe most usual, the most widespread method used in the 
official Social-Democratic literature of our day in respect of 
Marxist teachings. Such a substitution is, of course, not new > 
one can see it even in the history of classic Greek philosophy. 
In the process of camouflaging Marxism as opportunism, the 
substitution of eclecticism for dialectics is the best method of 
deceiving the masses, Ft gives an illusory satisfaction. It 
seems to take into account all sides of the process, all the 
tendencies of development, all the contradictory factors and so 
forth, whereas, in reality, it offers no consistent revolutionary 
view of the process of social development at all. 


We have already said above and shall show more fully at a 
later stage that the teaching of Marx and Engéls regarding 
the inevitability of a violent revolution refers to the capitalist 
State. It cannot be replaced by the proletarian State (the 
dictatorship of the proletariat) through mere “withering away,” 
but, in accordance with the general rule, can only be brought 
about by a violent revolution. The hymn of praise sung in its 
honour by Engels and fully corresponding to the repeated 
declarations of Marx (see the concluding passages of the 
“Poverty of Philosophy” and the “Communist Manifesto,” with 
its proud andopen declaration of the inevitability of violent 
revolution ; also Marx’s “Criticism of the Gotha Programme 
of 1875,” in which, thirty vears after, he mercilessly castigates 
its opportunist character}—this praise is by nu means n mere 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 25 


“impulse,” a mere declamation, or a mere polemical sally. The 
necessity of systematically fostering among the masses this and 
only this point of view about violent revolution lies at the 
root of the whole of Marx’s and Engels’ teaching, and it is just 
the neglect of such propaganda and agitation both by the present 
predominant social-chanvinists and the Kautskian schools that 
brings their betrayal of it into prominent relief, 

The substitution of a proletarian for the capitalist State 7 
is impossible .without a violent revolution, while the abolition 
_ of the proletarian State, na is, of all States, is only possible 

through ° ‘withering away.” ee, 

Marx and Engels gave a full and concrete illustration of 
these views in their study of each revolutionary situation 
separately, by an analysis of the lessons of the experience of 
each individual revolution. To this, undoubtediy the most 
- important part of their work, we shall now pass. 


CHAPTER II. 
THE EXPERIENCE OF 1848-51. 
1. The Eve of Revolution. 


The first productions of mature Marxism— “The Poverty 
of Philosophy” and “The Communist Manifesto”—date from 
the very eve of the revolution of 1848. As a result of this fact, 
we have in them, side by side with a statement of the general 
principles of Marxism, a reflection, to a certain degree, of the 
concrete revolutionary situation at that moment. Consequently, 
it will possibly be more to the point to examine what the authors 
of these works had written of the State immediately before they 
drew conclusions from their experience of the years 1848-51. 

“The working class,” wrote Marx in “The Poverty 
of Philosophy,” “will, in the course of its development, 
replace the old bourgeois society by a society which will 
exclude classes and their antagonisms : there will no longer 
be any political authority in the proper sense of the word, 
since political authority is the official expression of the 
antagonism of classes within bourgeois society.” (German 

Edition, 1885, p. 182.) 

It is instructive to compare, side by side with this general 
statement of the idea of the disappearance of the State with the 
disappearance of classes, the statement contained in “The 
Communist Manifesto,” written by Marx and Engels a few 
months later—to be precise, in November, 1847 : 
| “Tracing the most general phases of the development of 
the proletariat, we. followed up the more or less hidden civil 
‘war within éxisting society to. the point at which it is transfor- 
med into open revolution, and the’. proletariat establishes its 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 27 


rule by means of the violent overthrow of the capitalist class... 
We have already seen that the first step in the workers’ revolu- 
tion is the transformation [literally “the promotion”| of the 
proletariat into the ruling class, the conquest of democracy...-.-- 
sees The proletariat will use its political supremacy in order 
gradually to wrest the whole of capital from the capitalist class, 
to centralise all the instruments of production in the hands of 
the State, i. e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class, 
' and to increase as quickly as possible the total of productive 
forces.” (7th German Edition, 1906, pp. 31-37.) 

Here we have a formulation of one of the most remarkable 
and most important ideas of Marxism on the subject of the 
State—namely, the idea of “the dictatorship of the proletariat’ 
(as Marx and Engels began to write after the Paris Commune); 
and also a definition of the State, in the highest degree inter- 
esting, but nevertheless also belonging to the category of for- 
gotten thoughts of Marxism: “The State, that is, the proletariat 
organised as the ruling class.” 

This definition of the State, so far from having ever heen 
explained in the current propagandist and agitation literature 
of the official Social-Democratic parties, has been deliberately 
forgotten, as. it is quite irreconcilable with reformism, strikes 
straight at the heart of the common opportunist prejudices and 
middle class illusions about the “peaceful development of 
democracy.” 

“The proletariat needs the State,” a phrase repeated by all 
the opportunists, social-chauvinists and Kautskians, who 
assure us that this is what Marx taught. They “forget” how- 
ever, to add that, in the first place, the proletariat, according to 
Marx, needs only a withering away State—a State that is so 
constituted that it begins to wither away immediately, and can- 
not but wither away ; and, secondly, the workers “need” a State, 
“that is, the proletariat organised as the ruling class.” 


28 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


The State is a particular form of organisation of force ; it is 
the organisation of violence for the purpose of holding down some 
class. What is the class which the proletariat must hold down ? 
It can only be, naturally, the exploiting class, i.e., the bourgeoisie. 
The toilers need the State only to overcome the resistance of 
the exploiters, and only the proletariat can guide this suppres- 
sion and bring it to fulfilment--the proletariat, the only class 
revolutionary to the finish, the only class which can unite all 
the toilers and the exploited in the struggle against the capitalist 
class for its complete displacement from power. 


The exploiting classes need political supremacy in order to 
maintuin exploitation, i.e., in the selfish interests of a tiny minority, 
and aguinst the vast majority of the community. The exploited 
classes need political supremacy in order completely to abolish 
all exploitation, ie, in the interests of the enormous majority of 
the people, and against the tiny majority constituted by the 
slave-owners of modern times—the landlords and the capitalists. 
The lower middle class democrats, these sham Socialists who 
have replaced the class-war by dreams of harmony between 
classes, have imagined even the transition to Socialism, in a 
dream, a8 it were—that is, not in the form of the overthrow of 
the supremacy of the exploiting class, but in the form of the 
peaceful submission of the minority to the fully enlightened 
majority. This lower middle class Utopia, indissolubly connec- 
ted with the vision of a State above classes, in practice led to 
the betrayal of ths interests of the toiling classes, as was shown, 
for example, in the history of the revolutions of 1848 and 1871, 
and in that of “Socialist” participation in bourgeois ministries 
in England, France, Italy and other countries, at the end of the 
19th and the beginning of the 20th centuries. 


Marx fought all his lifé against this lower middle class 
Socialism—now re-born in Russia in the Menshevik and S. R. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 29 


parties. He carried his analysis of the class war logically, right 
up to the doctrine on political power and the State. 

The overthrow of capitalist supremacy can be accomplished 
only by the proletariat, as the particular class, which is being 
prepared for this work, and is provided both with the opportunity 
and the power to perform it, by the economic conditions of its 
existence. While the capitalist class breaks up and dissolves 
the peasantry and all the lower middle classss, it welds together, 
unites and organises the town proletariat. Only the proletariat 
—on account of its economic role in production on a large 
scale—is capable of leading all the toiling and exploited masses, 
who are exploited, oppressed, crushed by the capitalists often 
more, not less, than the town proletariat, but who are incapable 
of carrying on the struggle for freedom unaided. 

The doctrine of the class war, as applied by Marx to the 
question of the State and of the Socialist revolution, leads in- 
evitably to the recognition of the political supremacy of the 
proletariat, of its dictatorship, i.e., of an authority shared with 
none else and relying directly upon the armed force of the 
masses. The overthrow of the capitalist class is feasible only 
by the transformation of the proletariat into the ruling class, 
able to crush the inevitable and desperate resistance of the 
bourgeoisie, and to organise, for the new settlement of economic 
order, all the toiling and exploited masses. 

The proletariat needs the State, the centralised organisation 
of force and violence, both’ for the purpose of crushing the 
resistance of the exploiters and for the purpose of guiding the 
great mass of the population—the peasantry, the lower middle 
class, the semi-proletariat—in the work of economic Socialist 
reconstruction. 

By educating a workers’ party, Marxism educates also the 
advancc-guard of the proletariat, capable of assuming power 
_and of leading the whole community to Socialism, fit to direct 


30 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


and organise the new order, to be the teacher, guide, leader of 

all the toiling and exploited in the task of building up their 

common life without capitalists and against capitalists. As 

against this, the opportunism predominant at present breeds in l 
the Labour movement a class of representatives of the better- 

paid workers, who lose touch with the rank and file,’ “get on” 

fairly well under capitalism, and sell their birthright for a mess 

of ‘pottage, i.e., renounce their role of revolutionary leaders of the 

péople against the capitalist class. 

“The State, i.e., the proletariat organised as the ruling class” 
—this theory of Marx’s is ‘indissolubly connected with all his. 
teaching concerning the revolutionary part to be played in 
history by the proletariat. The fulfilment of this part is prole- 
tarian dictatorship, the political supremacy of the proletariat. 
But, if the proletariat needs the State, as a particular form 
of organisation of force against the capitalist Class, the question 
almost spontaneously forces itself upon us : Is it thinkable that 
such an organisation can be created’ without a preliminary: 
breaking-up and‘destruction of thé machinery of government 
created for its own use by the capitalist class ? The “Communist 
Miattifesto” leads us straight to this conclusion, and it is of this. 
conclusion that Marx wrote when summing up the practical 
results of the ‘revolutionary experiende gaincd between 184% 
and 1851. 


2. | The Results of Revolution. 


' Ou this question’ of the State with which we are concerned, 
Marx sums up his conclusions:-from the revolutions’ of the 
years 1848-51 in the following way (in his work “The: peaenteont 
Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte”): __ ) 

“Nevertheless, the revolution is thorough.: Ti is still passing 
through its purgatory. It is doing its work systematically. “By: 
December 2nd, 1851 [ the day of Levis Bonapartes ‘soup d'etat } 


STATE AND REVOLUTION əl 


it had fulfilled half of its programme ; now it is fulfilling the 
other half. First, it perfected parliamentary power, in order to 
be able to overthrow it. Now, when this has been accomplished 
it is drawing the executive power through the perfecting process ; 
it reduces that power to its simplest terms, isolates it, sets it up 
against itself as its own sole reproach—allin order to concen- 
trate against it all the forces of destruction [the black type is 
ours). And when the revolution has completed this second part 
of its preliminary work, Europe will rise to exclaim in triumph, 
‘Well grubbed, old mole !’......This executive power with its 
enormous bureaucratic and military organisation, with its multi- 
form and artificial machinery of government, with its army of half 
a million officials, side by side with a military force of another 
half million, this frightful parasitic organism covering as with a 
net the whole body of French society and blocking up all its 
pores, had arisen in the period of absolute monarchy, at the 
time of the fall of feudalism :a fall which this organism had 
helped to hasten.” 

The first French Revolution developed ccntralisation “but 
at the same time increased the scope, the attributes, the number 
of servants of the central government. Napoleon completed 
this government wachinery.” The Legitimist and the July 
monarchies “contributed nothing but a greater division of 
labour.”...... “Finally, the Parliamentary Republic found itself 
compelled, in its struggle against the revolution, along with 
its repressive measures, to increase the resources and the 
centralisation of the State. Every revolution brought this. 
machine to greater perfection instead of breaking it up [the 
black type is ours]. The political parties, which alternately 
struggled for supremacy, looked upon the capture of this gigantic 
governmental structure as the principal spoils of victory.” 
(“Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte,” 1907 German 
edition, pp. 98-99.) 


32 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


In this remarkable passage Marxism makes a great step 
forward in comparison with the position of the “Communist 
Manifesto.” There the question of the State is dealt with still 
extremely in the abstract, and most general ideas and expressions 
are employed. Here the question becomes concrete, and the 
conclusions are most precise, definite, practical: all former 
revolutions helped to perfect the machinery of government, 
whereas now we must shatter it, break it to pieces. 


This conclusion is the chief and fundamental point in the 
Marxist theory of the State, yet it is exactly this fundamental 
point which has been not merely completely “forgotten” by the 
dominant official Social-Democratic parties, but absolutely 
distorted (as we shall see later) by the foremost theoretician of 
the Second International, K. Kautsky. | 


In the “Communist Manifesto” are set out the general lessons 
of history, which force us to see in the State the organ of class 
domination, and bring us to the necessary conclusion that 
the proletariat cannot overthrow the capitalist class without, 
as a preliminary step, winning political power, without obtain- 
ing political supremacy, without transforming the State into 
' the “proletariat organised as the ruling class’; and that 
this proletarian State must begin to wither away immediately 
after its victory, because in a community without class 
antagonisms, the State is unnecessary and impossible. At this 
stage the problem is not yet considered as to what form, from 
the point of view of historical development, this replacement 
of the capitalist State by the proletarian State is to assume. 


It is precisely this problem that is stated and solved by 
Marx in 1852. True to his philosophy of dialectical materia- 
lism, Marx takes as his basis the experience of the great 
revolutionary years 1848-51. Here, as everywhere, his 
teaching is the summing up of practical experience, illuminated l 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 33 


by a profound philosophical world-conception and a great 
knowledge of history. 

The problem of the State is put concretely: how in actual 
fact, the capitalist State arose, that is, the Governmental 
machine necessary for capitalist supremacy ? What have 
been -its changes, what has been its evolution in the course 
of the bourgeois revolutions and in the face of the spontaneous 
risings of the oppressed classes? What are the problems 
confronting the proletariat in respect of this government 
machine ? 

The centralised power of the State, peculiar to capitalist 
society, grew up in the period of the fall of feudalism. Two 
institutions are especially characteristic of this machine: the 
bureaucracy and the standing army. More than once, in the 
works of Marx and Engels, we find mention of the thousand 
threads which connect these institutions with the capitalist 
class; and the experience of every worker illustrates this 
connection with extraordinary clearness and impressiveness. 
The working class learns to recognise this connection by its own 
bitter experience; thatis why it so easily acquires, so firmly 
absorbs the idea of its inevitability—an idea which the lower 
middle class democrats either: ignorantly and superficially 
deny, or, stil more superficially admit “in theory” forgetting 
to draw the corresponding practical conclusions. 

The bureaucracy and the standing army constitute a “parasite” 
on the body of capitalist society—a parasite born of the 
internal struggles which tear that society asunder, but essentially 
a parasite, “blocking up” the pores of existence. The Kautskian 
opportunism prevalent at present amongst the official Social- 
Democratic parties considers this view of the State as a parasitic 
organism to be the peculiar and exclusive property of anarchism. 
Naturally, this distortion of Marxism is extremely useful to 
those philistines who have brought Socialism to the unheard-of 


34 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


disgrace of trying to justify and gloss over an Imperialist war 
on the pretext of “defence of the fatherland” ; but none the less 
it is an absolute distortion. 

The development, perfection, strengthening of the bureau- 
cratic and military apparatus has been going on during all those 
bourgeois revolutions of which Europe has been so many since 
the decay of feudalism. 

In particular, the lower middle classes are attracted to the 
side of the capitalists and to their allegiance, largely by means 
of this very apparatus, which provides the upper sections of the 
peasantry, artisans, and tradesmen with a number of compara- 
tively comfortable, quiet and respectoble posts, and thereby 
raises their holders above the general mass. Consider what 
happend in Russia during the six months following February 
27th (March 12th), 1917. The government posts, which hitherto 
had been given by preference to members of the Black Hun- 
dreds, now became the booty of Cadets, Mensheviks and Socia- 
list-Revolutionaries. Nobody really thought of any serious 
reforms, They were to be put off ‘till the Constituent Assem- 
bly”, which, in its turn, was gradually put off until the end of 
the war! But there was no delay, no waiting for a Constituent 
Assembly in the matter of dividing the spoils, of capturing snug 
places like Ministries, Under-Secretaryships, Governor-General- 
ships, etc., etc.! The game of permutations and combinations 
that went on in connection with the composition of the Provi- 
sional Government was, in reality, merely the expression of this 
division and re-division of the spoils, as it was going on high 
and' low, up and down the country, in all departments of the 
central and local government. The concrete, practical result 
of the six months between February 27th (March 12th) and 
August 27th (September 9th), 1917, is beyond all dispute : 
reforms shelved, distribution of the official places accomplished, 
and “mistakes” in the distribution corrected by a few re- 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 35 


shufflings. But the longer the process of re-shuffling the posts 
goes on among the various capitalist and middle class parties 
{among the Cadets, S. Rs and Mensheviks, if we take the case 
of Russia), the more clearly the oppressed classes, with the 
proletariat at their head, begin to realise the irreconcilable 
opposition of their interests to the whole of capitalist society. 
Hence arises the necessity for the bourgeois parties, even for 
the most democratic and “revolutionary democratic” sections, 
to increase their repressive measures against the revolutionary 
proletariat, to strengthen the machinery of repression, that is, 
the power of the State. Such a course of events compels the 
revolution “to concentrate all the forces of destruction” 
against the State, and to regard the problem as one notof 
perfecting the machinery of the State, but of breaking up and 
annihilating it. 

It was not logical theorising, but the practical course of 
events, the living experience of the years 1848-51, that produced 
such a statement of the problem. We can see to what extent . 
Marx held strictly to the solid ground of historical experience 
from the fact that, in 1852, he did not as yet deal concretely 
with the question of what was to replace this State machinery 
that had to be destroyed. Experience had not as yet yielded 
material data sufficient for the solution of such a problem: 
history placed it on the order of the day later on, in 1871. In 
1852 it could only be laid down, with the accuracy that comes 
of scientific historical observation, that the proletarian revolu- 
tion had arrived at the stage when it must consider the problem 
of “concentrating all the forces of destruction” against the 
State, of “breaking” the governmental machine. 

Here the question may arise.: is it correct to generalise the 
experience, observation and conclusions of Marx, and to apply 
them to a wider scene of action than that of France during three 
years (1848-51)? In the discussion of this point, let us recall, 


36 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


tJ 


first of all, a remark of Engels, and then proceed to examine 
our facts. l 
“France,” wrote Engels in his introduction to the 3rd 
Edition of the “Eighteenth Brumaire”, “France is a country 
in which the historical struggle of classes, more than in 
any other, was carried each time to a decisive conclusion. 
In France were hammered into most definite shapes those 
changing political forms within which that class struggle 
went on, and through which its results found expression. 
The centre of feudalism during the Middle Ages ; the model 
country, with the most centralised monarchy, based on 
rigid ranks and orders after the MRennaissance, France 
shattered feudalism during the Great Revolution, and 
founded the undiluted supremacy of the middle class with 
such classical clearness as was to be found in no other 
European country. And the struggle of ‘the revolting 
proletariat against the capitalist tyranny is in its turn tak- 
ing here an acute form which is unknown elsewhere.” 
(Edition 1907, p. 4.) 
The last sentence is out of date, inasmuch as there has been 
a lull in the revolutionary struggle of the French proletariat 
since 1871; though, long as this lull may be, it in no way 
excludes the possibiliy that, in the oncoming proletarian revolu- 
tion, France may once more reveal itself as the traditional home 
of the class war to a finish. | 
Let us, however, cast a general glance over the history of 
the more advanced nations during the end of the 19th and 
beginning of the 20th centuries. We shall see that the same 
process has been going on more slowly, in more varied forms, 
ona much wider field. On the one hand, there has been a 
development of “parliamentary government” not only in the 
republican countries (France, America, Switzerland), but also 
in the monarchies (England, Germany to a certain extent, 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 37 


Italy, the Scandinavian countries etc.). On the other hand, 
there has been the struggle for power of the various middle and 
lower middle class parties distributing and re-distributing the 
“plunder” of official appointments, the foundations of capitalist 
society remaining all the while unchanged. Finally, there 
has been the perfecting and strengthening of the “Executive” 
and of its bureaucratic and military apparatus. 


There can be no doubt that these are the general features 
of the latest stage in the evolution of all capitalist States 
generally. In the three years, 1848-51, France had shown in 
a swift, sharp, concentrated form, all those processes of develop- 
ment which are inherent in the whole capitalist world. 


Imperialism in particular, the era of financial capital, the 
era of gigantic capitalist monopolies, the era of the transfor- 
mation of simple trust-capitalism into State trust-capitalism, 
shows an unprecedented strengthening of the “State” and an 
unheard of development of its bureaucratic and military 
- apparatus, side by side with the increase of oppression of the 
proletariat, alike in the monarchical and the freest republican 
countries. | 

World-history is undoubtedly leading up at the present 
moment, on an incomparably larger scale than in' 1852, to the 
“concentration of all the forces” of the proletarian revolution 
for the purpose of “breaking up” the machinery of the State. 


As to what the proletariat will put in its ‘place, instructive 
data on the subject were given us by the Paris Commune. 


3. The Formulation of the Question by Marx 
in 1852. 


In 1907 Mehring published in the journal, “Neue Zeit” 
(XXV.. 2, 164), extracts from a letter by Marx to Weidemeir 


38 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


dated 5th March, 1852. In this letter, inter alia, the following 
remarkable dissertation is contained :— ' 

“As far as I am concerned, the honour does not belong 

to me for either having discovered the existence of classes 

in present society or ofthe struggle between the classes. 

Bourgeois historians a long time before me expounded the 

historical development of this class war and the bourgeois 

economists the economical structure of classes. What I did, 

was to prove the following: (1) That the existence of 

classes is connected only with certain historical struggles 
which are characteristic of the development of production. 

(2) That class war indispensably leads to the dictatorship 

of the proletariat. (3) That this dictatorship is only a 

transition to the destruction of any classes and to society 

without classes...... ” 

In these words Marx has succeeded in expressing with 
striking clearness, firstly, the fundamental differences between 
his teachings and those of the leading and best thinkers of 
the bourgeoisie, and secondly the meaning of his theory con- 
‘cerning the State. 

It is said, very often, that the main theme in the teachings 
of Marx is the class war, but this is not correct. And out of 
this error, here and there, is obtained an opportunist mutilation 
of Marxism, the falsification of it in the sense of acceptance 
for the bourgeoisie. The theory of class war was not created 
by Marx, but by the bourgeoisie before Marx and is for the 
bourgeoisie, generally speaking, acceptable. 

The one who recognises only the class war- is not yct a 
Marxist ; that one may be found not to have freed himself 
from the chains of bourgeois‘reasoning and politics. To limit 
Marxist theory to the teaching of the class war means to 
shorten Marxism—to multilate it, to bring it down to something 
-which is acceptable to the bourgeoisie. A Marxistis one who 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 39 


extends the recognition of class war to the recognition of the 
Dicfatorship of the Proletariat. In this is the main difference 
between a Marxist and an ordinary bourgeois. On this grind- 
stone it is necessary to test a real understanding and recogni- 
tion of Marxism. And it is not astonishing that when the history 
of Europe put before the working class this question, practi- 
cally, not only all opportunists and reformists, but all 
“Kautskians” (people who are wavering between reformism 
and Marsism) turned out to be poor philistines and petty 
bourgeois democrats, who denied the “Dictatorship of the 
Proletariat.” A brochure by Kautsky—“Dictatorship of the 
Proletariat,” published in August, 1918, i. e., long after the 
first edition of this book, is an example of petty bourgeois 
mutilation of Marxism and of mean renunciation of it in 
practice, by hypocritical recognition of it in words {see my 
brochure—Proletarian Revolution and Renegade Kautsky— 
Moscow, 1918). The present opportunism in the person of its 
main representative, late Marxist, K. Kautsky, comes wholly 
under the aforesaid characteristic of bourgeois ideology, because 
this opportunism limits the domain of recognition of class war 
within the domain of bourgeois relationship. (And within this 
‘domain, not a single educated Liberal will refuse to recognise 
“in principle” the class struggle.) Opportunism does not lead 
the recognition of class war up tothe main issue, up to the 
period of crossing from capitalism to Communism, up to the 
period of throwing off the bourgeoisie and a complete abolition 
of same. In reality this period inevitably becomes a period 
of violent class fights and, therefore, the State during this 
period inevitably must be a mew democratic State (for the 
proletariat and for the general poor) and a new dictatorial 
State (against the bourgeoisie). Further, the substance of the | 
teachings of Marz about the State is assimilated only by one 
“who understands that the dictatorship of one class i+ uccessary - 


40 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


not only for any class society generally, not only for the 
proletariat which overthrows the bourgeoisie, but for a whole 
historical period, which separates capitalism from “society 
without classes,” from Communism. The forms of bourgeois 
States are exceedingly various, but their substance is the same 
and in the last analysis inevitably the Dictatorship of the 
Bourgeoisie. The transition from capitalism to Communism 
will certainly bring a great variety and abundance of political 
forms, but the substance will inevitably be : l 


The Dictatorship of the Proletariat. 


CHAPTER IIL. 


THE EXPERIENCE OF THE PARIS 
COMMUNE OF 1871: MARX’S ANALYSIS. 


1. In What Lay the Heroism of the Communards ? 


It is known that in the autumn of 1870, a few months before 
the Commune, Marx warned the Paris workers, proving to them 
that an attempt to overthrow the government would be the folly 
of despair. But when, in March, 1871, a decisive battle was 
forced upon the workers and they accepted it, when the rising 
had become an accomplished fact, Marx welcomed the prole- 
tarian revolution with the greatest enthusiasm, in spite of 
unfavourable auguries. Marx did not fall back upon an 
attitude of pedantic condemnation of an “untimely” movement : 
unlike the all-too-famous Russian renegade from Marxism, 
Plekhanoff, who, in November, 1905, wrote in the sense of 
encouraging the workers’ and peasants’ struggle, but, after 
December, 1905, took up the liberal cry of “You should not 
have resorted to arms.” 

Marx, however, was not only enthusiastic about the heroism 
of the Communards—‘storming Heaven,” as he said. In the 
mass revolutionary movement, although it did not attain its objec- 
tive, he saw a historic experiment of gigantic importance, a 
certain advance of the world proletarian, revolution, a practical 
step more important than hundreds of programmes and 
discussions. To analyse this experiment, to draw from it lessons 
in tactics, to re-examine his theory in the new light it afforded— 
such was the problem as it presented itself to Marx. The only 
“-orrection” which Marx thought it necessary to make in the 


42 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


“Communist Manifesto” was made by him on the basis of the 
revolutionary experience of the Paris Communardse 

The last preface to a new German edition of the “Communist 
Manifesto” signed by both it authors is dated June 24th, 1872. 
In this preface the authors, Karl Marx and Fricdrich Engels, 
say that the programme of the “Communist Manifesto” is now 
“in places out of date.” 


“Especially,” they continue, “did the Commune demonstrate 
that the ‘working class cannot simply setze the available 
ready machinery of the State and set it going for its own 
ends,’ 33 , 

The words within the second inverted commas of this 
passage are borrowed by its authors from Marx’s book on 
“The Civil War in France.” One fundamental and principal 
lesson of the Paris Commune, therefore, was considered by 
Marx and Eugels to be of such enormous importance that they 
introduced it as a vital correction into the “Communist 
Manifesto.” 

It is most chracteristic that it is precisely this correction 
which has been distorted by the opportunists, and its meaning, 
probably, is not clear to nine-tenths, if not ninty-nine 
hundreadths, of the readers of the “Communist Manifesto.” 
We shall deal with it more fully further on, in achapter devoted 
specially to distortions. It will be sufficient here to remark 
that the current, vulgar, “interpretation” of the famous formula 
of Marx here adduced consists in that Marx, itis said, is here 
emphasising the idea of gradual development, in contradistinc- 
tion to a sudden seizure of power, and so on. 


As a matter of fact, exactly the reverse is the case. What 
Marx says is that the working class must break up, shatter 
the “available ready machinery of the State,” and not confine 
itself merely to taking possession of it. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 43 


On April 12th, 1871—that is, just at the time of the 
Commune— Marx wrote to Kugelmann : 

“If you look at the last chapter of my “Eighteenth 
Brumaire,” you will see that I declare the next attempt of 
the French Revolution to be: not merely to hand over, 
from one set of hands to another, the bureaucratic and 
military machine—as has occurred hitherto—but to shatter it 
[Marx’s black type—the original is “zerbrechen”|; and it 
is this that is the preliminary condition of any real people’s 
revolution on the Continent. Itisexactly this that constitutes 
the attempt of our heroic Parisian comrades” (“Neue Zeit,’’ 
XX. i., 1901-2, p. 709.) 

In these words, “to shatter the bureaucratic and military 
machinery of the State,” is to be found, tersely expressed, the 
principal teaching of Marxism on the subject of the problems 
concerning the State, facing the proletariat in a revolution. 
And it is just this teaching which has not only been forgotten, 
but has also been completely distorted, by the prevailing 
Kautskian “interpretation” of Marxism ! 

As for Marx’s reference to the “Eighteenth Brumaire,” we 
have quoted the corresponding passage in full above. 

It is interesting particularly to notice two points in the 
passage quoted. First, he confines his conclusions to the 
Continent. This was natural in 1871, when England was still 
the pattern ofa purely capitalist country, without a military 
machine and, in large measure, without a bureaucracy. 

Hence Marx excluded England, where a revolution, even a 
people’s revolution, could be imagined, and was then possible, 
without the preliminary condition of the destruction “of the 
available ready machinery of the State.” 

To-day in 1917, in the epoch of the first great imperialist 
war, this distinction of Marx’s becomes unreal, and England and 
America, the greatest and last representatives of Anglo-Saxon 


44 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


“liberty” in the sense of the absence. of militarism and 
bureaucracy, have to-day completely rolled down into the dirty, 
bloody morass of military-bureaucratic institutions common to all 
Europe, subordinating all else to themselves, crushing all else 
under themselves. To-day, both in England and in America, 
the “preliminary condition of any real people’s revolution” 
is the break-up, the shattering of the “available ready 
machinery of the State” (perfected in those countries between 
1914 and 1917, up to the “European,” general imperialist 
standard). 

Secondly, this extremely pregnant remark of Marx is worth 
particular attention in that it states that the destructidn of the 
military and bureaucratic machinery of the State is “the preli- 
minary condition of any real people's revolution.” This idea 
of a “people’s” revolution seems strange on Marx’s lips. And 
the Russian Plekhanovists and Mensheviks, those followers of 
Struve who wish to be considered Marxists, might possibly 
consider such an expression a slip of the tongue. They have 
reduced Marxism to such a state of meagre “liberal” distortion 
that nothing exists for them beyond the distinction between 
capitalist and proletarian revolutions : and even that distinction 
becomes for them a lifeless doctrine. 

If we take examples from the revolutions of the 20th century, 
we shall, of course, have to recognise both the Portuguese and 
the Turkish revolutions to be middle class. Neither, however, 
is a people’s” revolution, inasmuch as the mass of the people, 
the enormous majority, does not make its appearance actively, 
independently, with its own economic and political demands, 
in either the one or the other. Onthe other hand, the Russian 
middle class revolution of 1905-7 , although it presented no such 
“brilliant” successes as at times fell to the lot of the Portuguese 
and Turkish revolutions, was undoubtedly a “real people’s” 
revolution, since the masses of the people, the majority, the 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 45 


lowest social “depths,” crushed down by oppression and 
exploitation, rose up independently, impressed on all the course 
of the revolution the stamp of their demands, their attempts to 
build up a new order on their own lines in place of the old 
shattered order. 


On the Continent of Europe, in 1871, ths proletariat did 
not in a single country constitute the majority of the people. 
A “people’s” revolution. actually sweeping the majority into 
its current, could be such only if embracing both the proletariat 
and the peasantry. Both classes then constituted the “people.” 
Both classes are united by the circumstance that the “military 
and bureaucratic machinery of the State” oppresses, crushes, 
exploits them. To shatter this machinary, to break it up—this 
is the true interest of the “people,” of its majority—the workers, 
and most of the peasants—this is the “preliminary condition’ 
of a union of the poorest peasantry with the proletarians : while, 
without such a union, democracy is unstable and Socialist re- 
construction is impossible. Towards such a union, as is well 
known, the Paris Commune was making its way : though it did 
not reach its goal, by reason of a number of circumstances, 
internal and external. 


Consequently, when speaking of “a real people’s revolution,” 
Marx did not in the least forget the peculiar characteristics of 
the lower middle classes (he spoke of them much and often), 
and was very carefully taking into account the actual relation- 
ship of classes in most of the Continental European States in 
1871. From another standpoint, also, he laid it down that the 
“shattering” of the machinery of the State is demanded by the 
interests both of the workers and of the peasants, unites them, 
places before them the common task of destroying the “parasite” 
and replacing it by something new. 


By what exactly ? 


g STATE AND REVOLUTION 


2. What isto Replace the Machinery of the State ? 


In 1847, in the “Communist Manifesto,” Marx was as yet . 
only able to answer this question entirely in an abstract manner, 
stating the problem rather than its solution. To replace this 
machinery by “the proletariat organised as the ruling class,” 
“by the conquest of democracy”—such was the answer of the 
“Communist Manifesto.” 

Refusing to plunge into Utopia, Marx waited for the expe- 
rience of a mass movement to produce the answer to the prob- 
lem as to the exact forms which this organisation of the prole- 
tariat as the dominant class will assume and exactly in what 
manner this organisation will embody the most complete, most 
consistent conquest of democracy.” Marx subjected the experi- 
ment of the Commune, although it was so meagre, to a most minute: 
analysis in his “Civil War in France.” Let us bring before the 
reader the most important passages of this work. 


In the 19th century took place the development of “the 
centralised State power, originating from the Middle Ages, with 
its ubiquitous organs: a standing army, police, bureaucracy, 
clergy and judges.” With the development of class antagonism 
between capital and labour, “the State assumed more and more 
the character of a pnblic organisation for the oppression of 
Labour, that is, of a machine for class domination. After every 
revolution marking a certain advance in the class struggle, the- 
purely oppressive character of the power of the State became: 
more and more apparent.” The State, after the revolution of 
1848-9 becomes “the national weapon of capital in its war 
against Labour.” The Second Empire consolidates this. 

' “The Commune was the direct antithesis of the Empire. 
It was a definite form...... of a Republic which was to abolish, 
not only the monarchical form of class rule, but also class rule 
itself.” 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 4T 


What was this “definite” form of the proletarian Socialist 
Republic ? What was the State it was beginning to create ? 

“The first decree of the Commune was the abolition of the 
standing army and its replacement by the nation in arms.” 
This demand now figures in the programme of every party calling 
itself Socialist. But the value of these programmes is best 
shown by the behaviour of our Socialist Revolutionaries and 
Mensheviks, who refused to put their theories into practice 
even after the Revolution of March 12th, 1417! 

“The Council of the Commune consisted of municipal re-- 
presentatives elected by universal suffrage in the various districts 
of Paris. They were responsible and could be recalled atany 
time. The majority were, naturally, working men or acknow- 
ledged representatives of the working class... ” 

rade The police, until then merely an instrument of the 
government, was immediately stripped of all its political func- 
tions, and turned into the responsible and at any time replaceable 
organ of the Commune...” 

“The same was applied to the officials of all other branches 
of the administration. From the members of the Council of 
the Commune down to the humblest worker, everybody in the- 
public services was paid at the same rates as ordinary working 
men. All privileges and representative allowances attached to- 
the high offices of the State disappeared along with the offices 
themselves...Having got rid of the standing army and police,. 
the material weapons of the old government, the Commune 
turned its attention, without delay, to breaking the weapons of 
spiritual oppression, the powcr of the priests...The judicial. 
functionaries lost their sham independence...In future, they 
were to be elected openly and to be responsible andrevocable...” 

And so the Commune would seem to have replaced the 
broken machinery of the State, “only” by a fuller democracy =: 
the abolition of the standing army and the transformation of 


48 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


all officials into elective and revocable agents of the State. 
But, as a matter of fact, this “only” represents a gigantic re- 
placement of one type of institutions by others of a fundamen- 
tally different order. Here we see precisely a case of the “trans- 
formation of quantity into quality.” Democracy, carried out 
with the fullest imaginable completeness and consistency, is 
transformed from capitalist democracy into proletarian demo- 
cracy : from the State (that is, a special force for the suppresion 
of a particular class) to something which is no longer really a 
form of the State. 

It is still necessary to suppress the capitalist class and crush 
its resistance. This was particularly necessary for the Com- 
mune ; and one of the reasons of its defeat was that it did not 
do this with sufficient determination. But the organ of suppres- 
sion is now the majority of the population, and not a minority 
as was always the case under slavery, serfdom and wage-labour. 
And, once the majority of the nation itself suppresses its 
oppressors a “special’’ force for suppression is no longer 
necessary. In this sense the State begins to disappear. Instead 
of the special institutions of a privileged minority (privileged 
officials and chiefs of a standing army), the majority can itself 
directly fulfil all these functions ; and the more the discharge of 
the functions of the State devolves upon the masses of the 
people, the less need is there for the existence of the State, 
itself. 

In this connection the special measures adopted by the 
‘Commune and emphasised by Marx, are particularly noteworthy : 
the abolition of all representative allowances, and of all special 
salaries in the case of officials; and the lowering of the payment 
of all servants of the State to the level of the workmen’s 
wages. Here is shown, more clearly than anywhere else, the 
break—from a bourgeois democracy to a proletarian democracy ; 
from the democracy of the oppressors to the democracy of the 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 49 


oppressed ; from the domination of a “special force” for the 
suppression of a given class to the suppression of the oppressors 
by the whole force of the majority of the nation—the prole- 
tariat and the peasants. And it is precisely on this most obvious 
point, perhaps the most important so far as the problem of the 
State is concerned, that the teachings of Marx have been for- 
gotten. It is entirely neglected in all the innumerable popular 
commentaries. It is not “proper” to speak about it as if it 
were a piece of old-fashioned “naivete” ; just as the Christians, 
having attained the position of a State religion “forget” the 
“naivete” of primitive Christianity, with its revolutionnary 
democratic spirit. : 

The lowering of the pay of the highest State officials seems 
simply a naive, primitive demand of democracy. One of the 
“founders” of the newest opportunism, the former Social-Demo- 
crat, E. Bernstein, has more than once exercised his talents in 
the repetition of the vulgar capitalist jeers at “primitive” demo- 
cracy. Like all opportunists, like the present followers of 
Kautsky, he quite failed to understand that, first of all, the tran- 
sition from capitalism to Socialism is impossible without 
“return,” in a measure, to “primitive” democracy. How can we 
-otherwise pass on to the discharge of all the functionsof govern- 
ment by the majority of the population and by every individual 
of the population. And, secondly, he forgot that “primitive de- 
mocracy” on the basis of capitalism and capitalist culture is not 
the same primitive democracy as in pre-historic or pre-capitalist 
times. Capitalist culture has created industry on a large scale 
in the shape of factories, railways, posts, telephones, and so 
forth : and on this basis the great majority of functions of “the 
old State” have become enormously simplified and reduced, in 
practice, to very simple operations such as registration, filing 
and checking. Hence they will be quite within the reach of 
every literate person, and it will be possibe to perform them for 


50 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the usual “working-mau’s wage.” This circumstance ought to 
and wil! strip them of all their former glamour as “government,” 
and, therefore, privileged service. 

The control of all officials, without exception, by the unreserved 
application of the principle of election and, at any time, re-call; 
and the approximation of their salaries to the “ordinary pay of 
the workers”—these are simple and “self-evident” democratic 
measures, which harmonise completely the interests of the wor- 
kers and the majority of peasants ; and, at the same time, serve 
as a bridge, leading from capitalism to Socialism. These mea- 
sures refer to the State, that is, to the purely political recons- 
truction of society ; but, of course, they only acquire their full 
meaning and importance when accompanied by the “expropria- 
tion of the expropriators” or at least by the preliminary steps to- 
wards it, that is, by the passage from capitalist private owner- 
ship of the means of prodaction to social ownership. 


“The Commune [wrote Marx] realised that ideal of all 
bourgeois revolutions, cheap government, by eliminating 
the two largest items of: expenditure—the army and the 
bureaucracy.” 


From the peasantry, as from other sections of the lower 
middle class, only an insignificant minority, “rise to the top,” 
and ‘enter society,” make a career in a bourgeois sense, that is, 
become transformed either into propertied members of the 
upper middle class, or into secure and privileged officials, The 
great majority of peasants in all capitalist countries where the 
peasant class does exist (and the majority of capitalist countries 
are of this kind) are oppressed by the government and long for 
its overthrow, in the hope of a “cheap” government. This 
hope can only be realised by the proletariat; and by the fact 
of realising it, the proletariat makes a step forward at the same 
time towards the Socialist reconstruction of the State. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 51 


3. The Destruction of Parliamentarism. 


“The Commune [wrote Marx] was to have been uot a parlia- 
mentary, but a workiug corporation, legislative and executive 
at oneand the same time. Instead of deciding once in 
three or six years which member of the ruling class was 
to ‘represant’ and repress the peopie in Parliament, universal 
suffrage was to serve the people, organised in communes, as 

a means of securing the necessary workers, controllers, 

clerks and so forth for its business in the same way as indi- 

vidual suitrage serves any individual employer in his.” 

This remarkable criticism of parliamentarism in I871 is also 
-one of those of Marx’s dicta which have been conveniently 
“forgotten,” thanks to the prevalence of Socialist chauvinism 
and opportunism. Ministers and professional politicians, “prac- 
tical” Socialists and traitors of the proletariat of to-day have 
left all criticism of parliamentarism to the anarchists, and, on 
this wonderfully intelligent ground, denounce all criticism of 
parliamentarism as “anarchism.” It is indeed not surprising 
that the proletariat of the most “advanced” parliamentary 
couutries, being disgusted with such “Socialists” as Messrs. 
Scheidemann, David, Legien, Sembat, Renaudel, Henderson, 
Vandervelde, Stauuing, Branting, Bissolati and Co., have been 
giving their sympathies more and more to anarcho-syndicalism, 
iu spite of the fact that it is but the twin brother of oppor- 
tunism. 


But to Marx revolutionary dialectics was never the empty 
fashionable phrase, the toy rattle, which Plekhanoff, Kautsky 
and the others, have made of it. Marx knew how to castigate 
anarchism pitilessly for its inability to make use of the “sty” of 
capitalist parliamentarism when the situation is not revolu~: 
tionary, but at the same time he knew how to subject parliamen- 
tarism to a really revolutionary proletarian criticism. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 


cr 
Do 


To decide once every few years which member of the 
ruling class is to repress and oppress the people through palia- 
liament—this is the real essence of middle class parliamentarism, 
not only in parliamentary and constitutional monarchies, but 
also in the most democratic republics. 

But if, in connection with the question of the State, parlia- 
mentarism is to be regarded as one of its institutions, what, 
from the point of view of those tasks which the proletariat has 
to face in this field, is to be the way out of parliamentarism ? 
How can we do without it ? 

Again and again we must repeat: The teaching of Marx, 
based on the study of the Commune, has been so completely 
forgotten that any criticism of parliamentarism other than 
anarchist or reactionary is quite unintelligible to the “Social- 
Democrats” (read—traitors to Socialism) of to-day. 

The way out of parliamentarism is to be found, of course, 
not in the abolition of the representative institutions and the 
elective principle, but in the conversion of the representative 
institutions from mere ‘talking shops” into working bodies : 
“The Commune was to have been not a parliamentary institu- 
tion, but a working corporation, legislative and executive at 
at one and the same time.” 

“Not a parliamentary, but a working” institution—this is 
directly aimed, as it were, at present-day parliamentarism and 
at the parliamentary Social-Democratic “lap-dogs.” Take any 
parliamentary country, from America to Switzerland, from 
France to England, Norway and so forth; the actual work of 
the State is done behind the scenes and is carried out by the 
departments, the chancelleries and the staffs. Parliament itself 
is given up to talk for the special purpose of fooling the 
“common people.” This is so true that even in the Russian 
Republic, in our middle class demoeratic republic, parliamen- 
tarism has already revealed its real purpose, through a real 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 53 


parliament has not yet come into existence. Such heroes 
of ‘putrid philistinism as the Skobeleffs and the Tseretellis, 
Tchernoffs and Avksentieffs have managed to pollute even the 
Soviets, after the model of most despicable middle class parlia- 
mentarism, by turning them into hollow talking shops. In the 
Soviets the Right Honourable “Socialist” Ministers are fooling 
the confiding peasants with phrases and resolutions. In the 
government itself a sort of incessant quadrille is going on in 
order that, on the one hand, as many Socialist-Revolutionaries 
and Mensheviks as possible may get at the “pie,” that is, the 
. “cushy” jobs, and that, on the other hand, the attention of the 
people may be occupied. All the while the real “State” business 
is being done in the chancelleries and the departments. 

“Delo Naroda,” the organ of the ruling party, the Socialist- 
Revolutionaries, recently admitted, in an editorial article, 
with the incomparable candour of people of “good society” in 
which “all” are engaged in political prostitution, that even in 
those Ministerial departments which belong to the “Socialists” 
(pray, excuse the term) the whole official apparatus remains 
essentially the same as of old, working as before, and obstructing 
every revolutionary initiative without let or hindrance. And 
indeed, even if we did not have this admission, would not the 
actual history of the participation of the Socialist-Revolutiona- 
ries and Mensheviks in the government prove this? It is only 
characteristic that, while in Ministerial company with the Cadets, 
Messrs. Tchernoff, Roussanoff, Zenzinoff and others of the 
“Delo Naroda” statf have so completely lost all shame that they 
unblushingly proclaim, as if it were a mere bagatelle, that in 
“their” Ministries everything remains as of old. Revolutionary 
and democratic phrases to gull the Simple Simons ; bureaucracy 
and red tape in the government departments for the “benefit” 
of the capitalists—here you have the essence of the present 
“honourable” coalition. 


34 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


For the mercenary and corrupt parliamentarism of capitalist 
society, the Commune substitutes institutions in which freedom 
of opinion and discussion does not become a mere delusion, for 
the representatives must themselves work, must themselves 
execute their owu laws, must themselves verify their results in 
actual practice, must themselves be directly responsible to their 
electorate. Representative institutions remain, but parliamen- 
tarism as a special system, as a division of labour between the 
legislative and the executive functions, as creating a privileged 
position for its deputies, no Jonger exists. Without representa- 
tive institutions we cannot imagine a democracy, even a pro- 
letarian democracy ; but we can and must think of democracy . 
without parliamentarism, if our criticism of capitalist society is 
not mere empty words, if to overthrow the supremacy of the 
capitalists is for us a serious and sincere aim, and not a 
mere ‘election ery” for catching working men’s votes—as 
it is with the Mensheviks and  Socialist-Revolutionaries, 
the Scheidemanns, the Legiens, the Sembats and the 
Vanderveldes. 

It is most instructive to notice that, in speaking of the fune- 
tions of what officials are still necessary both in the Commune 
and in the proletarian democracy, Marx compares them with 
the workers of “any other employer,” that is, of the usual 
capitalist concern, with its workers, foremen and clerks. There 
is no trace of Utopian thinking in Marx, in the sense of invent- 
ing or imagining a new” society. No, he studies, as a scientific 
historical process, the birth of the new society from the old, 
the forms of transition from the latter to the former. He takes 
the actual experience of a mass proletarian movement and tries 
_to draw from it practical lessons. He “learns” from the Com- 
mune as all great revolutionary thinkers have not been afraid 
to leari from the experience of great movements of the oppres-. 
. sed classes ; never preaching them pedantic “sermons” (such as 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 55 


Plekhanoft’s, “They should not have resorted to arms,” or 
Tseretelli’s “A class must know where to limit itself.”) 

To destroy officialism immediately, everywhere, completely— 
of this there can be no question. That is a utopia. But to break 
up at once the old bureaucratic machine and to start immedia- 
tely the construction of a new one, enabling us gradually to 
abolish bureaucracy—this is not a utopia, it is the experience 
of the Commune, it is the direct and necessary task of the re- 
volutionary proletariat. Capitalism simplifies the functions of 
“the government.” It makes it possible to throw off autocratic 
methods and to bring it all down to a matter of the organisation 
of the proletariat (as the ruling class) hiring “workers and clerks” 
in the name of the whole society. We are not utopians, we do 
not indulge in “dreams” of how best to do away immediately 
with all management, with all subordination : these are anarchist 
dreams based upon a want of understanding of the task ofa 
proletarian dictatorship. They are foreign in their essence to 
Marxism, and, as a matter of fact, they serve but to put off the 
Socialist revolution “until human nature is different.” No, 
we want the Socialist revolution with human nature as it is 
now: human nature itself cannot do without subordination, 
without control, without managers and clerks. 

But there must be submission to the armed vanguard of all 
the exploited and labouring classes—to the proletariat. The 
specific “bossing” methods of the State officials can and must 
begin to be replaced—immediately, within twenty-four hours— 
by the simple functions of managers and clerks—functions 
which are now already quite within the capacity of the average 
townsman and can well be performed for a working man’s 
wage. 

We must organise production on a large scale, starting from 
what has already been done by capitalism. By ourselves, we 
workers, relying on our own experience as workers, must create 

4 


56 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


an unshakable andiron discipline supported by the power of the 
armed workers ; we must reduce the role of the state officials to 
that of simply carrying out our instructions ; they must be res- 
ponsible, revocable, moderately paid “managers and clerks” 
(of course, with technical knowledge of all sorts, types and 
degrees). This is our proletarian task. With this we can and must 
begin when we have accomplished the proletarian revolution. Such 
a beginning, on the basis of large-scale industry, will of itself 
lead to the gradual decay of all bureaucracy, to the gradual 
creation of a new order, an order without inverted commas, an 
order bearing no similarity to wage slavery, an order in which 
the constant simplification of the functions of inspection and. 
registration will admit of their being performed by each in turn, 
will then become a habit, and will finally die out as special 
functions of a special class. 

A witty German Social-Democrat of the ’seventies of last 
century called the post office an example of the Socialist system. 
This is very true. At present the post office is a business organised 
on the lines of a State capitalist monopoly. Imperialism is 
gradually transforming all trusts into organisations of a similar 
type. Above the “common” workers, who are overloaded with 
work and yet starve, there stands the same bourgeois bureau- 
cracy. But the mechanism of social management is here 
already to hand. We have but to overthrow the capitalists, 
to crush with the iron hand of the armed workers the resistance 
of these exploiters, to break the bureaucratic machine of the 
modern State—and we have before us highly technically- 
fashioned machine freed of its parasites, which can quite well 
be set going by the united workers themselves, hiring their own 
technical advisers, their own inspectors, their own clerks, and 
paying them all, as, indeed, every “State” official, with the 
usual workers’ wage. Here isa concrete task immediately 
practicable and realisable as regards all trusts, which would rid 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 57 


the workers of exploitation and which would make practical 
use of the experience (especially in the task of the recon- 
struction of the State) which the Commune has given us. 
To organise our whole national economy like the postal system, 
but in such a way that the technical experts, inspectors, clerks 
and indeed, all persons employed, should receive no higher 
wage than the working man, and the whole under the manage- 
ment of the armed proletariat—this is our immediate aim. This 
is the kind of State and the economic basis we need. This is 
what will produce the destruction of parliamentarism, while 
retaining representative institutions. This is what will free the 
labouring classes from the prostitution of these institutions by 
the capitalist class. 


4. The Organisation of the Unity of the Nation. 


“In the short sketch of national organisation which the 
Commune had had no time to develop, it was stated quite 
clearly that the Commune was to become..-the political form of 
even the smallest village. ... From these Communes would be 
elected the “National” Delegation at Paris...” 

“The few but very important functions which would still 
remain for a Central Government, were not to be abolished— 
such a statement was a deliberate falsehood—but were to be 
discharged by communal, that is, strictly responsible agents...” 

“The unity of the nation was not to be destroyed, but, on 
the contrary, organised by means of the communal structure. 
The unity of the nation was to become a reality by the destruc- 
tion of the State, which claimed to be the embodiment of that 
unity and yet desired to be independent of, and superior to, 
the nation. In reality, this State was but a parasitic excrescence 
on the body of the nation...” 

“The problem consisted in this: Whilst amputating the 
purely repressive organs of the old government power, to wrest 


58 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


its legitimate functions from an authority which claims to be 
above society, and to hand them over to the responsible servants 
of society.” 

To what extent the opportunists of contemporary Social- 
Democracy have failed to understand—or perhaps it would be 
more true to say, did not want to understand—these words of 
Marx, is best shown by the book, as famous or infamous as the 
work of Herostratus, of the renegade Bernstein—“The Funda- 
mentals of Socialism and the Problems of Social-Democracy.” 
It is just in connection with the above passage from Marx that 
Bernstein wrote saying that this programme “in its political 
content displays, in all its essential features, the greatest simi- 
larity to the federalism of Proudhon ...In spite of all the other 
points of difference between Marx and the ‘petty shopkeeper’ 
Proudhon [Bernstein places the words ‘petty shopkeeper’ in 
inverted commas in order to make them sound ironical], on 
these points their currents of thought resemble one another as 
closely as could be.” Of course, Bernstein continues, the 
importance, of the municipalities is growing, but “it seems to 
me doubtful whether the first task of the democracy would be 
such a dissolution ("Auflosung”) of modern forms of the State, 
and such a complete transformation (“Umwandlung”) of their 
organisation as is imagincd by Marx and by Proudhon, that 
is, the formation of a national assembly from delegates of the 
provincial or district assemblies, which, in their turn, would 
consist of delegates from the Communes, so that the whole 
previous mode of national representation would vanish 
completely.” (Bernstein, “Fundamentals,” pp. 134—136, 
German Edition, 1899.) 

Tt is really monstrous thus to confuse Marx’s views on the 
“destruction of the State as parasite” with the federalism of 
‘Proudhon. But this is no accident, for it never occurs to the 
opportunist that Marx is not speaking here at all of federalism 


~ 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 59 


as opposed to Centralism, but of the destruction of the capita- 
list machinery of government which exists in all bourgeois 
countries. 

The opportunist cannot see further than the “municipalities” 
which he finds around him in a society of middle class philis- 
tinism and “reformist” stagnation. As fora proletarian revo- 
lution, the opportunist has forgotten eyen how to imagine it. 
It is amusing. But it is remarkable that this point of Berns- 
tein’s has not been disputed. Bernstein has been refuted often 
enough especially by Plekhanoff in Russian literature, and by 
Kautsky in European, but neither made any remark upon 
this perversion of Marx by Bernstein. i 

The opportunist has forgotten to such an extent how to 
think in a revolutionary way and how to reflect on revolution, 
that he attributes “federalism” to Marx. mixing him up with 
the founder of anarchism, Proudhon ; and, although they are 
anxious to be orthodox Marxists and to defend the teaching 
of revolutionary Marxism, Kautsky, and Plekhanoff are never- 
theless silent on this point. Herein lies one of the roots of 
those banalities and platitudes about the difference between 
Marxism and Anarchism, which are common to both Kautskians 
and opportunists, and which we shall have to discuss later. 


There is no trace of Federalism in Marx’s discussion of 
the experience of the Commune, quoted above. Marx agrees 
with Proudhon precisely on that point which has quite escaped 
the opportunist Bernstein ; while he differs from Proudhon 
just on the point where Bernstein sees their agreement. Marx 
concurs with Proudhon in that they both stand for the “demo- 
lition” of the contemporary machinery of government. ‘This 
common ground of Marxism with anarchism (both with Prou- 
dhon and with Bakunin), neither the opportunists nor the 
Kautskians wish to see, for on this point they have themselves 
diverged from Marxism. Marx does differ both from Proudhon 


60 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


and Bakunin on the point of federalism (not to speak of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat). Federalism isa direct funda- 
mental outcome of the anarchist petty middle class ideas. Marx 
is a centralist ; and in the above cited quotation of his specu- 
lations there is no withdrawal from the central position. Only 
people full of middle class “superstituous faith” in the State 
can mistake the destruction of the bourgeois State for the 
destruction of centralism. 

But will it not be centralism if the proletariat and poorest 
peasantry take the power of the State into their own hands, 
organise themselves quite freely into communes, and co-ordinate 
the action of all the communes for the purpose of striking at. 
capital, for the purpose of crushing the resistance of the capi- 
talists, in order to accomplish the transference of private 
property in railways, factories, land, and so forth to the nation, 
to the whole of society ? Will that not be the most consistent 
democratic centralism ? And proletarian centralism at that ? 

Bernstein simply cannot conceive the possibility of 
voluntary centralism, of a voluntary union of the communes” 
into a nation, a voluntary fusion of the proletarian communes 
in the businnss of destroying capitalist supremacy and the 
capitalist machinery of government. Like all philistines, 
Bernstein can imagine centralism only as something from above, 
to be imposed and maintained solely by means of bureaucracy 
and militarism. 

Marx, as though he foresaw the possibility of the distortion 
of his ideas, purposely emphasises that the accusation against 
the Commune that it desired to destroy the unity of the nation, 
to do away with a central authority, was a deliberate falsehood> 
He purposely uses the phrase “to organise the unity of the 
nation ,” so as to oppose the conscious, democratic, proletarian 
centralism to the capitalist, military, official centralism. 

But none so ‘deaf as those who will not hear. And the 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 61 


opportunists of modern Social-Democracy do not, on any | 
account, want to hear of the destruction of the State, of the 
removal of the parasite. 


5. The Destruction of the Parasite-State. 


We have already quoted the words of Marx on this subject, 
and must now supplement them. 

“Tt is generally the fate of new creations of history, [wrote 
Marx], to be mistaken for any old and even defunct forms of 
social life to which the new institutions may bear a sort of 
likeness. Thus, this new Commune, which is breaking up 
(“bricht”) the modern State, was regarded as the resurrection 
of the medieval communes...as a federation of smal! States 
(Montesquieu, the Girondins) as an exaggerated form of the 
ancient struggle against over centralisation...The Communal 
constitution would have restored to the social body all those 
forces hitherto devoured by the parasitic excrescence called 
“the State,’ feeding upon society and hindering it from moving 
forward freely. By this one act the regeneration of France 
would have been advanced... 

“The Commual constitution would have brought the rural 
producers under the intellectual leadership of the chief towns 
of each district, and would have secured for them there, in the 
persons of the town workers, the natural representatives of 
their interests. The very existence of the Commune would 
have involved, as a matter of course, local self-government, but 
no longer as a balance to the power of the State, which now 
becoms superfluous...” 

“The annihilation of the power of the state,” which was a 
“parasitic excrescence,” its “amputation,” its “destruction” ; 
“the power of the State now becomes superfluous”—these are 
the expressions used by Marx regarding the State when apprai- 
sing and analysing the experience of the commune. 


62 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


All this was written a little less than half a century ago: 
and now one has to excavate, as it were, in order to bring 
uncorrupted Marxism to the knowledge of the masses. The 
conclusions drawn from the observation of the last great revolu- 
tion, through which Marx lived, have been forgotten just at 
the moment when the time has arrived for the next great 
proletarain revolutions. 

“The variety of interpreatations ‘to which the Commune: 
has been subjected, and the multiplicity of interests which 
found their expression in it, proves that it was a thoroughly 
flexible political form, whereas all previous forms of government 
have been, in their essence, repressive. Its true seeret was 
this. It was essentially the government of the working class, 
the result of the struggle of the appropriating class; it was the 
political form, at last discovered, under which Labour could 
work out its economic emancipation...” 

“Without this last condition the Communal constitution 
would have been an impossibility and a delusion.” 

The Utopians had busied themselves with the “discovery” 
of the political forms under which the Socialist reconstruction 
of society could take place. The Anarchists turned away from 
the question of political forms of any kind. The opportunists 
of modern Social-Democracy have accepted the capitalist 
political forms of a parliamentary democratic State as the limit 
which cannot be overstepped; they have broken their fores 
heads praying before this idol, and they have denounced as 
anarchism every attempt to destroy these forms. 

Marx deduced from the whole history of Socialism and of 
political struggle that the State was bound to disappear, and 
that the transitional form of its disappearance (the transition 
from the political State to the non-State) would be the “proleta- 
riat organised as the ruling class.” But Marx did not under- 
take the task of “discovering” the political “forms” of this future 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 63 


stage. He limited himself to an exact observation of French 
history, its analysis and the conclusion to which the year 1851 
had led, viz., that matters were moving towards the destruction 
of the capitalist machinery of the State. 

And when the mass revolutionary movement of the proleta- 
riat burst forth, Marx, in spite of the failure of that movement, 
in spite of its short life and its patent weakness, began to study 
what political forms it had disclosed. 
= The Commune was the form “discovered at last” by the 
proletarian revolution, under which the economic liberation 
of Labour can proceed. The Commune was the first attempt 
of a proletarian revolution to break up the bourgeois State, 
and constitutes the political form, “discovered at last,” which 
can and must take the place of the broken machine. We shall 
see below that the Russian revolutions of 1905 and 1917, in 
different surroundings and under different circumstances, have 
have been continuing the work of the Commune and have 
been confirming Marx’s analysis of history. 


CHAPTER IY. 


CONTINUATION, SUPPLEMENTARY 
EXPLANATIONS BY ENGELS. 


Marx gave us the fundamentals on the subject of the meaning 
of the Commune. Engels returned to the same question 
repeatedly, elucidating Marx’s analysis and conclusions, some- 
times explaining so clearly and forcibly other sides of the 
question that we must stop expressly to consider these 
explanations. 


1, The Housing Questions. 


Already in his work on the Housing Question (1872) Engels 
took into account the experience of the Commune, dwelling 
several times on the problems of the revolution in relation to the 
State. It is interesting to note that in the treatment of this 
concrete question we are shown clearly, on the one hand, those 
features of the proletarian State which resemble features of the 
present State—features which give us ground for speaking of a 
State in both cases ; and, on the other hand, the features which 
differentiate them and mark the transition to the destruction of 
the State. 

“How can the housing problem be solved? In modern 
society this question is solved, like every other social question, 
by a gradual economic equalisation of supply and demand. This, 
however, is a kind of solution which itself constantly creates 
the problem anew, that is, it gives no solution. How the 
social revolution will solve this question depends not only on 
circumstances of time and place, but itis bound up with ques- 
tions which go much further, amongst which one of the most 
important is the abolition of the distinction between town and 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 6 


country. As we are not interested in utopian speculations on 
thë structure of future society. it would be more than a waste 
of time to dwell upon this point. One thing is certain; even 
now there are sufficient habitable buildings in the large towns 
materially to relieve the real shortage of accommodation, if 
sensible use were made of them. This, of course, could only 
be brought about by the expropriation of their present 
possessors, and by settling in them the homeless workers or 
the workers who are now living in overcrowded homes. And 
as soon as the workers win political power, such a measure, 
based on the best interests of society, will be as easily carried 
out as all other expropriations and commandeerings by the 
modern State.” (German Edition, 1887, p. 22.) 

Here it is not the change in the form of the State which is 
considered, but only the character of its acitivity. Expropria- 
tions and the occupation of houses take place by direction 
even of the present State. The proletarian State, from the 
formal point of the view, will also “direct” the occupation of 
houses and the expropriation of buildings. But it is clear that 
the old executive apparatus, the bureaucracy, connected with 
the bourgeoisie, would simply be useless for the carrying out 
of the orders of the proletarian State. 

“It is necessary to state that the actual seizure of all the 
means of labour and of all industry by the labouring masses 
of the nation is direct antithesis to the Proudhonist “buying out.’ ` 
Under the Proudhonist system the individual worker becomes 
the owner of a house, of a small-holder’s plot of land, of 
necessary tools. In the other case, however, the ‘labouring 
people’ becomes the collective owner of houses, factories and 
tools. The use of these houses, factories and so forth, will 
hardly be offered, at any rate, during the transition period, to 
single individuals or to companies, without covering the expen- 
ses. In the same way, the abolition of the private ownership 


66 STATE AND REVOLUTION ° 


of land does not pre-suppose the abolition of rent, but its han- 
ding over, although in a different form, to the whole of society, 
The actul appropriation of all the means of labour by the 
labouring masses does not exclude in any way, therefore, the 
preservation of the right to rent or let.” (p. 69.) 

In the next chapter we shall discuss the question touched 
on here, namely, the economic reasons for the “withering away” 
of the State. Engels expresses himself most cautiously here, 
saying that the proletarian State will “hardly” allot houses 
without pay, “at apy rate, during the period of transition.” 
The letting of houses, belonging to the whole nation, to separate 
families for rent pre-supposes the collection of this rent, a 
certain amount of control, and some standard or other to guide 
the allotment of the houses. All this demands a certain form 
of State, butit does not at all involve a special military and 
bureaucratic apparatus, with officials occupying privileged 
positions. A transition to a state of affairs when it will 
be possible to let houses without rent is bound up with the 
complete “withering away” of the State. 

Speaking of the conversion of the Blanqnists after the 
Commune, and under the influence of its experience, to the 
Marxist point of view, Engels, it so happens, formulates it as, 

“The necessity for political action by the proletariat and 
for proletarian dictatorship, as the transition towards the 
abolition of classes and, together with them, of the State...” 
(p. 55.) 

Those who are addicted to hair-splitting or bourgeois “exter- 
minators of Marxism,” will perhaps see a contradiction between 
this admission of the “abolition of the State” and the repudia- 
tion of a formula like that of the anarchists, contained in the 
quotation from the “Anti-Dubring,” given above. It would not 
be surprising if the opportunists wrote down Engels, too, as an 

“Anarchist” for the Socialist-Chauvinists are now more and 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 67 


more adopting the fashion of accusing the Internationalists of 
anarchism. 

That, together with the abolition of classes, the State will 
also be abolished—this Marxism has always taught. The well- 
known passage on the “withering away of the State” in the 
“Anti-Dubring’’ does not accuse the anarchists merely of being 
in favour of the abolition of the State, but of spreading the 
theory that it is possible to accomplish this “within twenty-four 
hours.” In view of the complete distortion, by the present 
predominating “Social-Democratic’ doctrine concerning the 
relation of Marxism to anarchism, of the question of the abo- 
lition of the State, it will be particularly useful to recall one 
particular controversy of Marx and Engels with the anarchists. 


&. The Dispute with the Anarchists. 


This dispute occurred in 1873. Marx and Engels then 
contributed articles against the Proudhonist “Autonomists” or 
“ Anti-Authoritarians” to an Italian Socialist review, and it was 
only in 1913 that these articles appeared in German in the 
“Neue Zeit.” 

“If the political struggle of the working class, [ wrote 

Marx, ridiculing the anarchists for their repudiation of 

political action] assumes a revolutionary form; if the 

workers, in place of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, set 
up their own revolutionary dictatorship, then they commit 

a terrible crime and offer an insult to principle; because, 

forsooth, the workers inorder to meet the miserable, gross 

requirements of the moment, in order to crush the resis- 

tance of the capitalist class, cause the State to assume a 

revolutionary and transitional form, instead of laying down 

their arms and abolishing the State.” (“Neue Zeit,” 1913-4, 

year 32, vol. L, p. 40.) 


68 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


This alone is the kind of “abolition” of the State, against 
which Marx protested, refuting the anarchists. He protested 
not against the theory of the disappearance of the State 
when classes disappear, or of its abolition when classes have 
been abolished, but only against the proposition that the 
workers should deny themselves the use of arms, the use of 
organised force, that is, the use of the State, for the purpose 
of “breaking the resistance of the capitalist .class.” Marx 
purposely emphasises, in order that the true sense of his con- 
tentions against the anarchists might not be perverted, “the 
revolutionary and transitional form” of the State necessary 
for the proletariat. The proletariat only needs the State 
temporarily. We donot at all disagree with the anarchists on 
the question of the abolition of the State as a final aim. But 
we affirm that, for the attainment of this aim, we must make 
temporary use of the weapons and methods of the State against 
the exploiters, just as the temporary dictatorship of the oppr- 
essed class is necessary for the annihilation of all classes. 
Marx chooses the sharpest and clearest mode of stating the 
position against the anarchists. Having cast off the yoke of 
the capitalists, ought the workers “to lay down their arms,” or 
should they use them against the capitalists in order to break 
their resistance ? And the systematic employment of arms by 
one class against the other, what is that it not a “transitional 
form of the State” ? 

Let every Social-Democrat ask himself whether that was 
the way in which he examined the question of the State in his 
discussion with the anarchists? Was that the way in which 
the vast majority of tbe official Social-Democratic parties of 
the Second International treated it ? 

Engels develops these same ideas in even greater detail and 
more simply. He first of all ridicules the muddled ideas of 
the Proudhonists, who called themselves “Anti-Authoritarians,” 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 69 


that is, they denied every form of authority, of subordination, 
of'`power. Take a factory, a ‘railway, a vessel on the open seas, 
said Engels ; is it not clear that not one of these complex 
technical concerns, based on the use of machines and the 
ordered co-operation of many people, could function without 
a certain amount of subordination and consequently, of 
authority or power? “When Euse these arguments,” writes 
Engels, “against the most hopeless Anti-Authoritarians, they 
can only give me the following answer, ‘Ah, that is true, but 
the question is not of the authority we confer on our delegates, 
but of a certain commission.’ These people think that a 
thing can be altered by merely changing its name.” 

Having shown in this way that authority and autonomy 
are relative terms, that the sphere of their application varies 
with the various phases of social development, that it is absurd 
to regard them as absolute terms; after adding that the domain 
of the application of machinery and production of a large 
scale is ever extending, Engels passes from a general discussion 
of authority to the question of the State. 

“If the Autonomists [he writes] merely meant to say that 
the social organisation of the (future would admit authority 
only within those limits which the conditions of industry 
inevitably dictate, then it would be possible to come to an 
understanding with them. But they are blind in respect of 
all the facts which make authority necessary, and they fight 
passionately against a mere word. 

“Why do not the ,Anti-Authoritarians limit themselves 
to shouting against the political authority, against the 
State ? All Socialists agree that the State, and together with 
it, also political authority, will vanish asthe result of the 
future Socialist Revolution, i. e. that public functions will 
lose their political character and will be transformed into 
simple administrative functions, concerned with social 


70 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


interests. But the Anti-Authoritarians demand that the 

political State should be abolished at one blow, even before 

those social relations which gave birth to the State are 
themselves abolished. They demand thatthe first act of 
the social revolution shall be the abolition of all authority. 

“Those gentlemen, have they ever seen a revolution? 
Revolution is undoubtedly the most authoritative thing 
possible. Revolution is an act in which part of the population 
forces its will on the other part by means of rifles, bayonets, 
cannon, i.e, by most authoritative means. And the conquering 
party is inevitably forced to maintain its supremacy by means 
of that fear which its arms inspire in the reactionaries. Had 
‘the Paris Cemmune not relied on the authority of the armed 
people against the bourgeoisie, would it have lasted longer than 
a single day ? May we not rather censure the Commune for 
not having made sufficient use of this authority? And so, 
either the Anti-Authoritarians themselves do not know what 
they are talking about, in which case they merely sow 
‘confusion ; or they do know what they are talking about, in 
which case they are betraying the proletariat. In either case 
they serve only the interests of reaction” (p. 39), 

In this discussion questions are touched on, which must be 
investigated in connection with the subject of the correlation 
of politics and economics during the “withering away” of the 
State. (The next chapter treats of this subject.) Such are the 
problems of the transformation of the nature of public func- 
tions, from political to simply administrative, and of the “politi- 
cal State.” This last: term, particularly liable to cause 
misunderstanding, indicates the process of the “withering away” 
of the State: the dying State, at a certain stage of its decay, 
can be called a non-political State. The most remarkable point 
in our quotation from Engel’s work is again the way he puts 
the position against the anarchists. Social-Democrats, desiring 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 71 


to be disciples of Engels, have disputed with the anarchists 
thoùsands of times since 1873, but they have uot disputed at 
all as Marxists can and should. The anarchist idea of the 
abolition ot the State is muddled and non-revoiutionary—that 
is how Engels puts it. It is precisely the revòiutios, in its 
rise and development, with its specific probien:s in r-lation to 
violence, anthority. power and the State. that the anarchists do 
not wish to see. The usual criticism of the anarchists by the 
modern Social-Democrats has been reducea tu the purest 
middle class triviality: “We, forsooth, recognise the State, 
whereas the anarchists do not.” Naturally such triviatities 
cannot but repel any revolutionary working men who think 
at all. Engels says something quite different. He emphasises 
that all Socialists recognise the dissappearance ot the State as 
a result of the Socialist Revolution. He then deals with tke 
concrete question of the revolution—that very question which, 
as a rule, the Social-Democrats, because of their opportunism, 
evade, leaving it, so to speak, exclusively for the anarchists 
“to work out.” And in thus formulating the question Engels 
takes the bull by the horns. Ought not the Commune to have 
made more use of the revolutionary power of the State, 
that is, of the proletariat armed and organised as the 
ruling class ? 

The modern predomiuating official Sociai-Democracy has 
generally dismissed the concrete problems facing the proictatiat 
during the revolution, either by some inane philistine jeers, or, 
at the best, by the evasive sophism—* Wait and s-e,” And the 
anarchists have thus gained the right to reproach such Social- 
Democrats with betraying their mission of educating the work- 
ing class in revolution. Engels makes use of the experience of 
the last proletarian revolution for the direct purpose of drawing 
from it concrete conclusions as to what and how the proletariat 
should do and act concerning both banks and the State. 


T2 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


toed 


3. The Letter to Bebel. 


One of the most remarkable, if not the most remarkable. 
reasoning in the works of Marx and Engels on the State is. 
contained in the following passage in Engels’ letter to. 
Bebel on March 18th-28th, 1875. This letter, we may remark 
in passing, was first published, so far as we know, by Bebel, in 
the second volume of his memoirs (“My Life”), published in 
1911, that is, thirty-six years after the writing and despatvh of 
the letter. 

Engels wrote to Bebel, criticising that same draft of the 
Gotha programme, which Marx criticised in his famous letter 
to Bracke, and,referring particularly to the question of the 
State, said : 

“The Free People’s State has been transformed into a 
Free State. According to the grammatical meaning of the 
words, the Free State is one in which the State is free in 
relation to its citizens, that is, a State witha despotic 
government. It would be well to throw overboard all 
this nonsense about the State, especially after the Commune, 
which was already no longer a State in the propersense of 
the word. 

“The anarchists have too long been able to throw into 
our teeth this ‘People’s State,’ although already, in Marx’s 
works against Proudhon, and then in the “Communist 
Manifesto,” it was stated quite plainly that with the 
introduction of the Socialist order of society, the State will: 
dissolve of itself (“sich auflost”), and will disappear. As the’ 
State is only a transitional institution which we are obliged — 
to ase in the revolutionary struggle in order forcibly to 
crush our opponents, itisa pure absurdity to speak of a 
Free People’s State. During the period when the proletariat 
still needs the State, it does not require it in the interests. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 3 


of freedom, but in the interest of crushing its antagonists; 

‘and when it becomes possible really to speak of freedom, 

then the State, as such, ceases to exist. We should, there- 

fore, suggest that everywhere the word State be replaced 
by “Gemeinwesen” (Commonwealth), a fine old German 
word, which corresponds to the French word “Commune”. 

(p. 322, German Edition.) 

One should bear in mind that this letter refers to the party 
programme which Marx criticised in his letter dated only a few 
weeks later then the above ( Marx’s letter of May 5th, 1875 ), 
and that Engels was living at the time with Marx in London. 
Consequently, when he says “we” Engels undoubtedly suggests 
to the leader of the German working class party, both in his 
own and in Marx’s name, that the word “State” should be 
struck out of their programme and exchanged for “Common- 
wealth.” 

What a howl about “anarchism” would be raised by the 
leaders of present-day “Marxism” adulterated to meet the 
requirments of the opportunists, if such an alteration in their 
programme were suggested to them. Let them howl. The 
capitalist class will pat them on the back for it. 

In the ‘meantime, however, we shall go on with our work. In 
revising the programme of our Party, Engels’ and Marx’s advice 
must undoubtedly be taken into consideration in order to come 
nearer to the truth, to re-establish Marxism, to purge it from 
distortion, to direct the struggle for freedom of the working 
class into the right channels. Among the Bolsheviks there will 
certainly be none opposed to the advice of Engels and Marx. 
Diificulties may, perhaps, crop up regarding terminology. In 
German there are two words meaning “Commonwealth,” of 
which Engels used the one which does not denote a single com- 
munity, but the sum of all, a system of communities. In Russian 
there is no such word, and perhaps we may have to choose 


74 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the French word “Commune,” although this also has its 
drawbacks.” i 

“The Commune was no longer a State in the proper sense of 
the word.” Here is Engels’ most important theoretical proposi- 
tion. Aiter what has been said above, this statement is quite 
intelligible. The Commune ceased to be a State in so far as it 
had to repress, not the majority. but a minority, of the popula- 
tion (the exploiters} ; it had broken the bourgeois | machinery of 
government, and, in the place of a special repressive force, the 
whole population itself was coming on the scene. All this isa 
departure from the State in its proper sense. And had the 
Commune become consolidated, the relics of the State would of 
themselves have “withered away” within it; there would have 
been no need for the State to “abolish” its institutions, they 
would have ceased to function in proportion as less and less was 
left for them to do. 

“The Anarchists throw into our teeth the ‘Peoples State.” In 
saying this, Engels has in mind especially Bakunin and his 
attacks on the German Social-Democrats. Engels admits these 
attacks to be justified in so far as the “People’s State’ is as 
senseless and as far removed from Socialism as the “Free Peo- 
ple’s State.” Engels tries to alter the character of the contro- 
versy of the German Social-Democrats with the anarchists, to 
make it true to principle, and clear it from opportunist prejudice 
concerning the “State.” Alas{ Engels’ letter has been stowed 
away for thirty-six years. We shallsee below that, even after 
the publication of Engels’ letter, Kautsky still obstinately con- 
tinues to repeat those very mistakes against which Engels gave 
his warning. 

*It will be seen that the English language possesses just the equivalent 
of the German “Gemeinwesen,” which the Russian lacks. It is even 


probable that the German term was suggested to Engels bythe English word. 
— Trans. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 75 


Bebel replied to Engels in a letter, dated September 21st, 
1875, in which, amongst other things, he wrote that he “fully 
agreed” with Engels’ criticism of the projected programme, and 
that he had reproched Liebknecht for his readiness to make con- 
cessions (Bebel’s “Memoirs,” German Edition, voi. IL p. 304) 
But if we take Bebel’s pamphlet, “Our Aims,” we shall find 
there absolutely wrong views of the State. “The State must be 
transformed from one based on class supremacy to a people's 
State” (“Unsere Ziele,” 1886, p. 14). This is printed in the 
ninth edition of Bebel’s pamphlet. Small wonder that such 
constantly repeated opportunist views of the State have been 
absorbed by the German Social-Democracy, especially as the 
revolutionary interpretations by Engels were sately stowed away, 
and all the conditions of life have been such as to wean them 


7 * Bde ia sg a a un, 
from revolution. (it a, 25555 Pý oe | 
4. Criticism of the Draft of the Erfurt proarai 


In a discussion of the doctrines of Marxism sepgarding the _ 
State, the criticism of the Erfurt Programme sent by Encels to, 
Kautsky of June 29th, 1891, and: only published ten years, liter. 
in the “Neue Zeit,” cannot be passed over ; for this criticism ‘is 
mainly concerned with the opportunist views of Social-Demo- 
cracy on the questions of State organisation. 

In passing we may note that Engels also raises an exeeed- 
ingly valuable point of economies, which shows how attentively 
and thoughtfully he followed the various phases of the latest 
developments of capitalism, and how he was able, in consequ- 
ence, to foresee to a certain extent the problems of our own, the 
imperialist epoch. Here is this point. Touching on the words 
used in the draft of the programme, “the want of ordered plan” 
as characteristic of capitalism, Engels writes : 

“If we pass from joint stock companies to trusts, which get 
hold of and monopolise whole branches of industry, not only 


76 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


private production, but also the want of ordered plan dis- 
appears.” (“Neue Zeit,” year 20, vol. I.. 1901-2 p. 8). l 

Here we have what is most essential in the theoretical appre- 
ciation of the latest phase of capitalism, that is imperialism, viz., 
that capitalism becomes monopolistic capitalism. This fact 
must be emphasised because the “reformist” middle class view 
that monopolistic capitalism, whether private or State, is no 
longer capitalism, but can already be termed “State Socialism,” 
or something of that sort, is one of the most widespread errors. 
The trusts, of course, have not given us, and indeed, cannot give 
us, full and complete order and system in production. But, how- 
ever much of an ordered plan they may yield, however closely 
capitalist magnates may estimate in advance the required extent 
of production on a national and even iuter-national scale, and, 
however carefully and systematically they may regulate it, we 
still remain under capitalism, it is true, in its latest phase, but 
still, undoubtedly, capitalism. The nearness of such capitalism 
to Socialism should be, in the mouth of real repesentatives of 
the proletariat, an argument for the nearness, ease, feasibility 
and urgency of the Socialist revolution, and not at all one for 
tolerating a repudiation of such a revolution, or the attempts to 
make capitalism look attractive, in which the reformists are 
habitually engaged. 

But to return to the question of the State. Engels makes here 
three valuable suggestions : in the first place, on the question of 
a republic ; secondly, on the connection between the problems 
of nationalities and the form of the State ; and thirdly, on local 
self-government. . 

With regard to the question of a republic, Engels made this 
point the gravamen of his criticism of the draft of the Erfurt 
programme ; and when we remember what animportant part the 
Erfurt programme has played in the International Social-Demo- 
cracy, how it become the model for the whole of the Second 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 7 


international, it may, without exaggeration, be said that Engels 
eriticised in this connection the opportuuisn: of the whole 
Second International. “The political demands of the draft,’ 
Engels writes, “are vitiated by a great fault. They do not men- 
tion (Engels’ black type) what ought certainly to have been 
said.” 

And, later on, he makes it clear that the German constitu- 
tion is but a copy of the reactionary constitution of 1540, that 
the Reichstag is only, as Wilhelm Liebknecht put it, “the tig- 
leat of Absolutism,” and that to “wish to make all the means of 
production public property” on the basis of a constitution which 
has legalised the existence of petty States aud federation of 
petty German States, is an “obvious absurdity.” 

“It is dangerous to touch on tbis subject,” Engelis adds, 
knowing full well that it was impossible for police reasons to 
include in the programme a demand for a republic in Germany. 
But Engels does not simply rest content with this obvious 
consideration which satisfies “everybody.” He continues : 

“But the matter must, in one way or another, be pressed 
forward. To what an extent this is essential is shown parti- 
cularly just now by the way opportunism is gaining ground in 
the Social-Democratic press. Fearing a renewal of the anti- 
Socialist Jaws, or rememberiug some premature declarations 
made when those laws in force, some people desire now that 
the Party should recognise the present legal order in Germany 
as sufficient for the peaceful! realisation of all its demands.” 

Engels brings out as of prime importance the fact that 
‘German Social-Democracy was acting in fear of the renewal of 
the Exceptional Laws, and, without hesitation, calls the oppor- 
tunism, declaring that just because of the absence of a republic 
and freedom in Germany, the dreams of a “peaceful” path were 
quite absurd. Engels is sufficiently careful not to tie his hands 
in advance. He admits that in republican or very free countries 


78 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


“one can conceive” (only “conceive” !) a peaceful development 
toward, Socialism, but in Germany he repeats : 

“In Germanv, where the Government is almost omnipotent, 
and the Reichstag and all other representative bodies have no 
real power, to proclaim anything of the sort, and that without 
any need, is to take off the figleaf from absolutism and to 
screen its nakedness by one’s own body...” 

The great majority of official leaders of German Social- 
Democracy. who “stowed away” this advice, have indeed proved 
the screen of absolutism. 

“Such a policy can only, in the end, lead the party on to: 
a false road. General abstract political questions are pus- 
hed to the foreground, and in this way all the immediate 
concrete problems which arise automatically on the order 
of the day at the first approach of important events, during 
the first political crisis, are hidden from sight. What else 
can result from this than that the party may suddenly, at 
the first critical moment, prove helpless, that on decisive 
questions confusion and division wlll arise within the party 
because these questions had never been discussed ? 

“This neglect of great fundamental considerations for 
the sake of the momentary interests of the day, this chase 
after momentary successes, and this race after them without 
account of ultimate results, this sacrifice of the future 
movement for the present, is, perhaps, the result of ‘honest’ 
motives, but is and remains, none the less, opportunism, 
and ‘honest’ opportunism is. perhaps, more dangerous than 
any other..--If there is anything about which there can be no 
doubt, it is that our party and the working class can only 
gain supremacy under a political regime like a democratic 
republic. This latter is, indeed, the specific form for the 
dictatorship of the proletariat, as has been demonstrated 
by the great French Revolution....” 


STATE AND REVOLUTION TS 


Engels repeats here in a particularly emphatic form the 
fundamental idea which, like a red thread, runs thronghout al! 
Marx’s work, viz. that the Democratic Republic is tae nearest, 
jumping-board to the dictatorship of the pro‘+tariat. For such 
a republic, without in the least setting aside the domination of 
capital, and, therefore, the oppression of the masses and the 
class struggle, inevitably leads to such an extension, intensifica- 
tion and development of that struggle that, as soor as the chance 
arises for satisfying the fundamental interests of the oppressed 
masses, this chance is realised inevitably and solely in the form 
of the dictatorship of the proletariat, of the guidance of these 
masses by the proletariat. These aiso have been, for the whole 
of the Second International, “forgotten words” of Marxism, 
and their neglect was demonstrated with particular vividness 
by the history of the Menshevik party during the first half of 
the Russian Revolution of 1917. 

On the question of a Federal Republic, in connection with 
the national composition of the population, Engels wrote : 

“What ought to arise in the place of present-day 

Germany (with its reactionary monarchist constitution and 

the equally reactionary division into small States, a division 

which perpetuates the peculiarities of “Prussianism’ instead 
of submerging them in Germany as a single whole)? In my 

opinion the proletariat can only make use of the form of a 

one and indivisible republic. A federal republice is still, as 

a whole, a neccesity iu the enormous territory of the United 

States, but even so it is already becoming an impediment 

in the Eastern States. It would be a progressive step in 

England, where four nationalities live on the two islands, 

and where, in spite of one Parliament, three systems of 

legislation exist side by side. It has long since become a 

hindrance in little Switzerland, and if there the Federal 

Republic can still be tolerated, itis only because Switzer- 


30 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


land is content with the role of an entirely passive member 
of the European State system. For Germany, a federalisation 
on the Swiss model would be an enormous step backward. 
Two points differentiate a federated State from a unitary 
State, viz., that each individual State within the union has 
its own civil and criminal legislation, its own particular 
judicial system ; and then this : that, side by side with the 
popular chamber, there is a chamber of representatives from 
the States in which every Canton votes as such, irrespec- 
tive of its size.” 

In Germany the Federated State is the transition to the 
complete unitary State, and the “revolutions from above” of 
1866 and 1870 must not be turned backwards, but must be 
completed by a “movement from below.” 

Engles not only shows no indifference to the question of the 
form of the State, but, on the contrary, analyses with the 
greatest possible care the transitional forms in order to establish, 
from the concrete- historical peculiarities of each separate case, 
from what and to what the given transitional form is evolving, — 

Engels, like Marx, insists, from the point of view: of the 
proletariat and the proletarian revolution, on democratic centra- 
lism, on the one and indivisible republic. The Federal Repub- 
lic is considered by him to be either an exception and a hin- 
drance to development, or a transitional form between a monar- 
chy and a centralised republic, a “progressive step in certain 
definite conditions.” And amongst these definite conditions 
arises the problem of nationalities, 

With Engels, as with Mars, in spite of their pitiless criticism 
of the reactionary nature of the small States, often, in certain 
concrete cases, hidden from the eye under the cloak of thé 
national question, there is nowhere a trace of any desire 
to ignore the national question—desire of which the Dutch and 
Polish Marxists are often guilty, as a result of their most 


STATE AND REVOLUTION Ji 


justifiable opposition to the narrow, middle class nationalism 
of “their” little States. l 

Even in England, where the geographical conditions, the 
common language, and the history of many centuries would seem 
to have put an end to the national question of the separate 
small divisions in Englaud—even here Engels is cognisant of 
the patent fact, that the national question has not yet been 
overcome, and recognises, in consequence, that the establishment 
of a federal republic would be a “progressive” step. Of course, 
there is no trace here of a renunciation of criticism of the 
defects of the Federal Republic or of the most determined 
propaganda and fight for a unitary and democratically-centra- 
lised republic. 

But Engels’ conception of a centralised democracy is not of 
that bureaucratic order with which middle class ideologists, 
{including anarchists) identify it. Centralism does not, with 
Engels, in the least exclude such wide local autonomy, which 
combines a voluntary defence of the unity of the State by the 
communes and districts with the absolute abolition of all 
bureaucracy and all “ordering about” from above. 

“And so we want a unitary republic [ writes Engels, setting 
out the programmatic views of Marxism on the State | but not 
in the sense of the present French Renublic, which is neither 
more nor less than the Empire established in 1798 without the 
Emperor. From 1792 to 1798 each French department, each 
municipality, enjoved complete self-government on the American 
model, and this is what we, ton, ought to have. How local 
self-covernment should be organised and how it is possible to 
do without a bureaucracy has been demonstrated to us by 
America and the first French Republic, and is still being 
demonstrated by Canada, Australia and other British Dominions. 
Such a provincial aud communal self-government is a far freer 
institution than, for instance, the Swiss Federation under which, 


82 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


Ed 


it is true, the Canton is very independent of the Bund [ that 
is, of the, Federal State as a whole | but is also independent of 
the district and the commune. The cantonal governments 
appoint the district state-hold-rs and prefects, a feature which 
is quite absent in the English--peaking countries, and which we, 
in our own country, must in the future abolish as completely 
as the Prussian ‘Landrate, Regierungsrate’” [ that is, all officials 
appointed from above |. 

In accordance with this, Engels suggests the following 
wording for the cause in the programme regarding self.govern- 
ment : Complete self-government for the provinces, districts 
and communes through officials elected by universal suffrage, 
the abolition of all local and provincial authorities appointed 
by the State.” 

In the “Pravda” of May 28th, 1917, suppressed by the 
Government of Kerensky and other “Socialist” Ministers, I 
had already occasion to point out how in this connection (not 
by any means in this alone ), our sham Socialist representatives 
of the sham-revolutionary sham-democracy, have scandalously 
departed from democracy. Naturally people who have allied 
themselves with the Imperialist capitalist class remained deaf 
to this criticism. . 

It is particularly important to note that Engels, armed with 
precise facts, disproves by a telling example the superstition 
very widespread, especially among the lower middle class 
democracy, that a Federal Republic necessarily means a larger 
amount of liberty than a centralised republic. This is not true. 
The facts cited by Engels regarding the centralised French 
Republic of 1792-98 and Federal Switzerland disprove this. 
The really democratic centralised republic gave more liberty 
than the federal republic—in other words, the greatest amouut 
of local freedom known in history was granted by a centralised 
republic, and not by a Federal Republic. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 83 


Insuificient attention has hitherto been paid to this fact, 
as indeed,to the whole question of federal and centralised 
republics and local self-government in our party literature and 
agitation. 


5. The Pretace of 1891 to Marx’s “Civil War 


a gg 
in France. 


In his preface to the third edition of the “Civil War in 
France” (this preface is dated March 1Sihb, 1591, and was 
originally published in the “Nene Zeit”) Engels, side by side 
with many other interesting questions in connection with the 
State, gives a remarkably striking resume of the lessons of the 
Commune. Thisresnme, confirmed by ail the experience of 
the period of twenty years separating the author from the 
Commune, and directed particularly against the “superstitious 
faith in the State” so widely diffused in Germany, can, quite 
justly, be called the last word of Marxism on the question here 
dealt with. 

In France, Engels notes, the workers were armed after every 
revolution. “Consequently the first commandment for every 
bourgeois at the head of the State was the disarmament of the 
workers. Accordingly, after every revolution won by the 
workers, a new struggle arose which ended with their defeat...’ 

This is a summing up of the experience of bourgeois revolu- 
tions, which is as short as it is expressive. The essence of the 
whole matter—also, by the way, of the question of the State— 
viz, has the oppressed class arms ?—is here -wonderfuliy weil 
expressed. Itis just this essential thing which, more often 
than not, is ignored both by professors under the influence of 
capitalist ideology and by the lower middle class democrats. 
In the Russian Revolution of 1917 it was to the “Menshevik,” 
a so-called “Marxist,” Tseretelli, that the Cavaignac honour 
fell of babbling out this secret of bourgoeis revolutions. In 


84 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


bis “historic” speech of June 9th (22nd) Tseretelli blundered 
out the decision of the bourgeoisie to disarm the Petrograd _ 
workers—referring, of course, to this decision as his own, and 
as a vital necessity for the State. 


Tseretelli’s historic speech of June 9th (22nd) will certainly 
constitute for every historian of the revolution of 1917 one 
of the clearest illustrations of how the “bloc” of Socialist- 
Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, led by Mr. Tseretelli, went 
over to the side of the capitalist class against the revolutionary 
proletariat. 


Another incidental remark of Engels’ also connected with 
the question of the State, dealt with religion. It is well known > 
that the German Social-Democracy, in proportion as it began 
to decay and to become more and more opportunist, slid down 
more and more frequently to the philistine misinterpretation 
of the celebrated formula, that “religlon is a private matter.” 
That is, this formula was twisted to mean that even for the 
party of the revolutionary proletariat the question of a religion < 
was aprivatematter. It was against this complete betrayal 
of the revolutionary programme of the proletariat Engels revol- 
ted. In 1891 he only saw the very feeble beginnings of oppor- 
tunism in his party, and, therefore, he expressed himself on the 
subject most cautiously : 


“Corresponding with the fact that in the Commune there 
sat, almost without exception, only workers, the decisions were 
distinguished by their resolute proletarin character. These de- 
cisons either decreed such reforms as the republican bourgeoisie 
had rejected only out of base cowardice, but which formed a ` 
necessary foundation for the free activity of the working class. 
Such, for instance, was the adoption of the principle that in 
relation fo the State religion is simply a private matter. Or 
the Commune promulgated decrees directly in the interests of 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 85 


the working class and, to a certain extent, inflicting deep wounds 
on the old body social.” 

Engels deliberately emphasised the words “in relation to the 
State,” not as a mere hint, but as a straight thrust at German 
opportunism which had declared religion to be a private matter 
in relation to the party ; thus lowering the party of the rovolu- 
tionary proletariat to the level of the most superficial “freethin- 
kers” of the middle class, ready to admit a non-religious State, 
but renouncing all party struggle against the religious opium 
which stupefies the people. 

The future historian of the German Social-Democracy in- 
vestigating the root causes of its shameful collapse in 1914, will 
find no little material of interest on this question, beein- 
ning with the evasive declarations in the articles on the intellec- 
tual leader of the party, Kautsky, opening the door wide to 
opportunism, and ending with the attitude of the party towards 
the “Los-von-Kirche Bewegung” ‘the movement for the disesta- 
blishment of the Church) in 1913. 

But let us pass on to the manner in which, twenty years 
after the Commune, Engels summed up its lessons for the strug- 
gling proletariat. 

Here are lessons to which Engels attached prime import- 
ance : i 

“Tt was just this oppressive power of the former centralised 
government, the army, the political police, the bureaucracy 
which Napoleon created in 1798, and which, from that time 
onwards, every new government had taken over as a desirable 
weapon for use against its opponents—it was just this power 
which should have fallen throughout France as it had fallen in 
Paris. | 

“The Commune was compelled to recognise from the very 
first that the working class, having obtained supremacy, could 
no longer carry on the businses of government by means of the 


£6 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


old machinery : that, in order that the working class might not 
lose again its newly-won supremacy, it must, on the one hand, 
sweep aside the whole of the old machine of oppression which 
had hitherto been used against it, and on the other, secure itself 
against its own deputies and official by, declaring them all, with- 
out exception, revocable at any time.” 

Engels emphasises again and again that not only in a monar- 
chy, but also in a democratic republic the State remains the 
State, that is, it retains its fundamental and characteristic 
feature, viz., the transformation of officials—“the servants of 
society” —and of its organs into the rulers of society. 

“Against this inevitable feature of all systems of government 
that have existed hitherto, viz. the transformation of the 
State and its organs from servants in the lords of society, the 
Commune, used two unfailing remedies. First, it appointed 
to all posts, administrative, legal, educational, persons elected 
by universal suffrage ; introducing at the same time the right 
of recalling those elected at any time by the decision of their 
electors. Secondly, it paid all officials, both high and low, only 
such pay as was received by any other worker. The highest 
salary paid by the Commune was 6,000 francs (about £240).* 

“Thus was created an effective barrier to place-hunting 
and career-making, even apart from the imperative mandates 
of the deputies in representative institution introduced by the 
Commune over and above this.” 


*Nominally this means about 2,400 roubles per annum. According to the 
present rates or exchange in Russia this would be equal to 6,000 roubles. 
Those Bolsheviks are making quite an unpardonable error who are propo- 
sing a salary of 9,000 roubles for members of the Town Duma, for instance, 
instead of suggesting a maximum salary of 6,000 roubles for the whole of 
the State—a sum quite sufficient for anybody. [As a matter of fact, the 
salaries of People’s Commissars after the Bolshevik Revolution were fixed 
at 500 roubles per month. Since then, however, the value ofthe rouble 
has still further decreased, so the salaries had to be raised—Trans] 


STATE AND REVOLUTION St 


Engels touches here on the interesting boundary wherea 
consistent democracy is, on the one hand, transformed into 
Socialism, and on the other, Socialism. For in order to destory 
the State, it is necessary to convert the fanctions of the public 
service into such simpie operations of control and book-keeping 
as are within the reach of the vast majority of the population, 
and, ultimately, of every single individual. And in order to do 
away completely with the political adventurer, it must be made 
impossible for an “honourable,” though unsalaried, sine cure in 
the public service to be used as a jumping-off ground fora 
highly profitable post in a bank or a joint stock company, as 
happens constantly in the freest capitalist countries. 

But Engels does not make the mistake made, for instance, 
by some Marxists on the question of the right of a nation to 
self-determination. viz.. that, forsooth, this is impossible under 
capitalism and will be unnecessary under Socialism. Such an 
apparently clever. but really incorrect statement might he re- 
peated of any democratic institution, amongst others, of the 
payment of moderate salaries to officials; for, during the life- 
time of capitalism a completely consistent democracy is 
impossible, whilst under Socialism all political democracy 
disappears. 

This is a sophism, comparable to the old humourous probiem 
of at what point a man will become baid if he loses his hair gne 
by one. | 

The development of democracy to its lozical conclusion, the 
investigation of the ferms of this development, festing them by 
practice, and so for.h—ail tuis is, part of the objects in the 
struggle for the Socia: Revolution. Taken separately, no kind 
of democracy will yield Socialism. But in actuai life democracy 
will never be “taken by itself”: it will be “taken together” 
with other things, it will exert its influence also on economics, 
helping on its re-organisation ; it will be subjected, in its turn, 


88 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


to the influence of economic development, and so on. This is 
the dialectical process of actual living history. Engels 
continues : 

“This disruption (“Sprengung”) of the old machinery 
of government and its replacement by a new and really 
democratic one, is described in detailin the third part of 
the “Civil War.” But it was necessary to dwell once more 
in brief on this point, that is, on one or two features of 
this replacement, because in Germany the superstitious 
faith in the State has left the realm of philosophy and passed 
into the general consciousness of the bourgeoisie and 
even of many workers. According to the teaching of the 
philosophers. the State is the ‘realisation of Idea,’ or 
translated into theological language, the Kingdom of God on 
earth, the State is the field in which is, or should be, realised 
eternal Truth and Justice. And from this follows a super- 
stitious reverence for the State and for everything appertain- 
ing to the State—a superstitious reverence which takes 
root the more readily as people are accustomed, from their 
childhood, to think that the affairs and interests common to 
the whole of society cannot be carried out and protected in 
any other way than in the one in existence—that is, by 
means of the State and its well-paid oficials. People think 
they are making an extraordinary big step forward if they 
rid themselves of faith in a hereditary monarchy and become 
partisans of a democratic republic. Whereas, in reality, 
the State is nothing more than an apparatus for the oppres- 
sion of one class by another, in a democratic republic, not a 
whit less than ina monarchy. At best the State is an evil 
inherited by the proletariat after coming out victorious in 
the struggle for class supremacy. The victorious proletariat 
just like the Commune, will be obliged immediately to 
amputate the worst features of this evil, until such time as 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 89 


a new generation, brought up under new and free social 
conditions, will prove capable of throwing on the dustheap 
all the useless old rubbish of State organisation.” 

Engels cautioned the Germans, in the event of the monarchy 
being replaced by a republic, not to forget the fundamentals of 
Socialism on the yuestion of the State in general. His warnings 
now read like a direct lesson to Messrs. Tseretelli and Teher- 
nof who revealed in their coalition tactics a superstitious faith 
in, aud respect towards, the State ! 

Two more points. (1) When Engels says thata demo- 
cratic republic, “not a whit less” than in a monarchy, the State 
remains an apparatus for the oppression of one class by 
another,” this by no meazs signifies that the form of, oppression 
is a matter of inditterence to the pro.ctariat, as some anerchists 
“teach.” A wilder, more free and open form the ciass straggle 
und class oppression enormously assists the proletariat iu its 
strnvule for the annihilation of all classes. 12) Why oniy anew 
generation will be able completely to scrap the ancient iumber of 
the State—this question is bound up with the question of the 
supersession of democracy, to which we now turn. 


6. Engels on the Supersession of Democracy. 


Engels had occasion to speak on this subiect in connection 
with the question of the “scientific? incorrectzess of the term 
“ Social-Democrat.” 

In the introduction to his edition of his articles of the 
*seventies on various subjects, mainiy on international questions 
(“Internationales aus dem Volkstaat”), dated January 3rd, 1894 
(that is, a year and a half before his death) Hage.s wrote that in 
all his articles he used the word “Commanist,” not “Social- 
Democrat” ; because at that time it was the Proudhonists in 
France and the Lassalleans in Germany who called themselves 
Social-Democrats. 


99 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


“For Marx and for me [Engels continues] it was, there- 
fore, quite impossible to use such an elastic term to describe 
our particular point of view. At the present time things 
are different, and this word (‘Social-Democrat’) may, perhaps, 
pass muster, although it remains inexact (“unpassend” 
literally ‘unsuitable’) for a party whose economic programme 
is not simply a general Socialist one, but definitely Comm- 
unist—for a party whose final political aimis the supersession 
of the whole State and, therefore, also of democracy. But 
the names of real (the black type is Engels’) political parties 
never completely correspond with fact : the party develops, 
the name remains.” 

The dialectician Engels remains true to dialectics to the last 
day of his life. Marx and I, he says, had a splendid, scientific, 
exact name for the party, but there was no real party, that is, 
no mass-proletarian party. Now, at: the end of the 19th 
century, there is a real party; but its name is scientifically 
incorrect. Never mind, “it will pass muster,” only let the party 
grow, only let not the scientific inexactness of its namo be 
hidden from it, and let it not hinder its development in the 
right direction. 

Perhaps, indeed, some humurist might comfort us Bolsheviks 
a la Engels : we have a real party, itis developing splendidly ; 
even such a meaningless and barbarous term as “Bolshevik” 
“will pass muster,” although it expresses nothing but the purely 
accidental fact that at the Brussels-London Conference of 1903 
we had a majority (Bolshinstvo), Perhaps now, when the July 
and August persecutions of our party by the republican and 

“revolutionary” middle class democracy have made the word 
“Bolshevik” such a universaily respected name; when, in 
addition, these persecutions have signalised such a great histo- 
rical step forward made by our party in its actual development, 
perhaps now even I should hesitate to repeat my April sugges- 


STATE AND REVOLUTION GL 


tion to change the name of our Party. Perhaps I would propose 
a “compromise” to our comrades, to call ourselves the 
Communist Party, but to retain “Bolsheviks” in brackets*... 
But the question of the name of the party is incomparably ‘ess 
important than the question of the relation of the revointionary 
proletariat to the State. 

In the usual debates about the State the mistake is cons- 
tantly made against which Engels cautions us here, and whick 
we have indicated above. Namely, it is constantly forgotten 
that the destruction of the State involves also the destruction 
of democracy ; that the “withering away” of tne State also 
means the “withering away” of democracy. At first sight such 
a statement seems exceedingly strange and incomprehensible. 
Indeed, perhaps some one or other may begin to fear lest we be 
expecting the advent of such as order oi society in which the 
principle of majority rule will not be respected—for is nota 
democracy just the recognition of this principle ? 

No, democracy is not identical with majority rule. No, de- 
mocracy is a State which recognises the subjection of the 
minority to the majority, that is, an organisation for the syste- 
matic use of violence by one class against the other, by one 
part of the population against another. 

We set ourselves, as our fina! aim. the task nf the destruction 
of the State, that is, of every organised and systematic 
violence, every form of violence, agaiust man in general. 
We do not expect the advent of an order of society 
in which the principle of submivsion of the minority to the 
majority will not be observed. But. striving for Socialism, we 
are convinced that it will develop further into Communism, 
and, side by side with this, there will vanish all need for fore, 

* This was actually done after the November Revolution: The Bol- 


shevik Party now officially styles itself : “Communist Party (of the Bolshe- 
viks”).—Trans. 


92 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


for the subjection of one man to another, of one section of 
society to another, since people will grow accustomed to 
observing the elementary conditions of social existence without 
force and without subjection. 

In order to emphasise this element of habit, Engels speaks 
of a mew generation, brought up under new and free social 
conditions which will prove capable of throwing on the dustheap 
all the useless old rubbish of State organisation”—every sort of 
State, including even the democratic republican State. 

For the elucidation of this, we must examine the question of 
the economic foundations of the withering away of the State. 


CHAPTER FV. 


THE ECONOMIC FOUNDATION OF THE 
“WITHERING AWAY” OF THE STATE, 


A most detailed elucidation of this question is given by 
Marx in his “Criticism of the Gotha Programme” (letter to 
Bracke, May 15th, 1875, printed as late as 1501 in the “Neue 
Zeit,” ix., I. The polemical part of this remarkable work 
consisting of a criticism of Lassailcanism has, so to speak, over- 
shadowed its positive part, nam-ly the analysis of the connection 
between the development of Communism and the “withering 
away” of the State. 


1. Formulation of the Question by Marx. 


From a superfical comparison of the letter of Marx to 
Bracke (May 15th, 1875) with Engels’ letter to Bebel (March 
28th, 1875), discussed above, it might appear that Marx was 
much more of an upholder of the State than Engels, and that 
the difference of opinion between them on the question of the 
State is very considerable. 

Engels suggests to Bebel that all the chatter about the State 
should be thrown overboard , that the word “State” should be 
eliminated from the programme and replaced by “Common- 
wealth” ; Engels even declares that the Commune was really 
no longer a State in the proper sense of the word. Whereas 
Marx even speaks of the “future State in Communist society,” 
that is, apparently recognising the necessity of a State even 
under Communism. 

But such a view would be fundamentally incorrect: and a 
eloser examination shows that Marx’s and Engels’ views on the 


94 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


State and its decay were completely identical, and that Marx’s 
expression quoted above refers merely tho the decaying 
State. 


It is clear that there can be no question of defining the exact 
moment of the future “withering away”—the more so as it must 
obviously be a prolonged process. The apparent difference 
between Marx and Engels is due to the different subjects they 
dealt with, the different aims they were pursuing. Engels set 
forth the problem in a plain, bold and large outline in order to 
show Bebel all the absurdity ofthe current supersitions concer- 
ning the State, shared to no small degree by Lassalle himself, 
Mars only touches upon this question in passing, being 
interested mainly in another subject—the evolution of Commu- 
nist society. The whole theory ot Marx is an application of 
the theory of evolution—in its most consistent, complete, well- 
thought-out and fruitful form—to modern Capitalism. Naturally, 
for Marx there arose the’ question of the application of this 
theory both to the coming crash of capitalism and to the future 
development of future Communism. 

On what foundation of facts can the future development of 
future Communism be based ? It can be based on the fact that 
it has its origin in capitalism, that is develops historically from 
capitalism, that it is the result of the action of social forces to 
which capitalism has given birth. There is no shadow of an 
attempt on Marx’s part to fabricate a utopia, idly to guess that 
which cannot be known. Mars treats the question of Commu- 
nism in the same way as a naturalist would treat the question 
of the development of, say a new biological variety, if he knew 
that such and such was its origin, and such and such is the 
direction in which it changes its form. 

Marx, first of all, brushes aside the confusion which is intro- 
duced by the Gotha programme into the question of the mutual 
‘relations of State and Society. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 95 


ts 


“Contemporary society [he writes! is capitalist society, 
which exists in all civilised countries, freed, to a greater or 
lesser extent. from admixture of medisevalism, more or less 
varying in type according to the peculiur histcrical condi- 
tions of development of each country, more or less fuliy 
developed The ‘contemporary State,’ on the contrary. varies 
with every State boundary. In the Prusso-German Empire 
it is quite a different thing from that in Switzerland; in 
England quite different from that in the United States. The 
‘contemporary State’ is, therefore, a fiction. 

“However, in spite of the motely variety of their forms, 
the different forms of the State in the different civilised 
countries have this in common—they re all based on 
contemporay bourgeois society, mare or less capitalisticaily 
developed. They have, thererorc, certain fundamenta: 
traits in common. In this sense one can speuk of the 
‘contemporary State’ i: contiadistinctisn to that future time 
when its present root, namely, vapitaiist society, will have 
perished. 

“The question is then pnt thus : To what transformation 
wil the forms of szoverniuent be sabjected in Communist 
society ? In other words what social functions will there 
remain, then, analogous to the pres-nt functions of the 
State ? This ynestion can only be answered with ‘he help 
of the seientific method ; and, however many thensends of 
times the word ‘neonle’ is combined with the word ‘State,’ 
this will not bring us one iota nearer its solntion....” 

Having thus ridiculed all the talk of a “People’s State,” 
Marx formulates the auestion and warns us, ns it were, that 
for a scientific answer to it one can only rely on firmly esta- 
blished scientific facts. 

The first fact that has been established with complete exact- 
ness by the whole theory of evolution, indeed, by the whole of 


96 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


science—a fact which the utopians forgot, however, and which 
is now forgotten by the present opportunists, afraid of’ the 
Socialist revolution—is that, historically, there must undoub- 
tedly be a special stage or epoch of transition from capitalism 


to Communism. 


9. The Transition from Capitalism to Communism. 


“Between capitalist and Communist society [Marx 
continues}, there lies a period of revolutionary transforma- 
tion from the former to the latter. A stage of political 
transition corresponds to this period, and the State during 
this period can be no other than the revolutionary dictator- 
ship of the proletariat.” 

This conclusion Marx bases on an analysis of the role played 
by the proletariat in modern capitalist society,on the facts of the 
development of this society and on the irreconcilability of the 
antagonistic interests of the proletarian and the capitalist class. 

Earlier the question was put thus: To attain its emancipa- 
tion the proletariat must overthrow the capitalist class, conquer 
political power and establish its own revolutionary dictatorship, 
Now the question is put somewhat differently : The transition 
from capitalist society developing towards Communism, to a 
Communist society, is impossible without a period of “political 
transition,” and the State in this period can only be the revolu- 
tionary dictatorship of the proletariat. 

What, then, is the relation of this dictatorship to democracy ? 

Wesaw that “The Communist Manifesto” simply places 
side by side the two ideas: the “conversion of the proletariat 
into the ruling class” and the “conquest of democracy.” On 
the basis of all that has been said above, one can define more 
exactly how democracy changes inthe transition of capitalism 
to Communism. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 97 


In capitalist society, under the conditions most favourable 
to its development, we have a more or less complete democracy 
in the form of a democratic republic. But this democracy is 
always bound by the narrow framework of capitalist exploita- 
tion, and consequently always remains, in reality, a democracy 
only for the minority, only for the possessing classes, only for 
the rich. Freedom in capitalist society always remains more 
or less the same as it wasin the ancient Greek republics, 
that is, freedom for the slave owners. The modern wage-slaves, 
in virtue of the conditions of capitalist exploitation, remain to 
such au extent crushed by want an poverty that they “cannot 
pe buthered with dcaocracy.” have “no time for politics” ; 
that, in the ordinary peaceful! course of events, the majority of 
the population is debarred from participating in public political 
life. 

The accuracy of this statement is perhaps most clearly 
proved by Germany, just because in this State constitutional 
legality has lasted and remained stabie for a remarkably long 
time—for nearly half a century (1571-1914: ; and the Social- 
Democracy during this time has been ab!e, far better than has 
been the case in other countries, to make use of “legality” in 
order to organise into a political party a iarger proportion of the 
working class than has occured anywhere else in the world. 

What, then, is the highest proportion of politically conscious 
and active wage-slaves that has so far been observed in 
capitalist society ? One million members of the Social-Demo- 
cratic Party out of fifteen millions of wage-workers: Three 
millions industrially organised out of fifteen millions! 

Democracy for an insignificant minority, democracy for the 
rich—that is the democracy of capitalist society. If we look 
more closely into the mechanism of capitalist democracy, every- 
where—in the so-called “petty” details of the suffrage (the 
residential qualification, exclusion of women, ete.), in the 


95 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


technique of the representative institutions, in the actual 
obstacles to the right of meeting (public buildings are not for 
the “poor”}, in the purely capitalist organisation of the daily 
press, ete., etc.—on all sides we shall see restrictions upon 
restrictions ot democracy. These restrictions, exceptions, 
excinsions, obstacles for the poor, seem slight—esnecially in the 
eyes of one who has himself never known want, and has never 
lived in close contact with the oppressed classes in their hard 
life, and nine-tenths, if not ninety-nine hundredths, of the 
bourgeois publicists and politicians are of this class! But in 
their sum these restrictions exclude and thrust out the poor from 
politics and from an active share in democracy. Marx splendidly 
grasped the essence of capitalist democracy, when, in his 
analysis of the experience of the Commune, he said that the 
oppressed are allowed, once every few years to decide which 
particular representatives of the oppressing class are to Tte- 
present and repress them in Parliament ! 


But from this capitalist democracy—inevitably narrow, 
stealthily thrusting aside the poor, and therefore, to its core, 
hypocritical and treacherous—progress does not march along a 
simple, smooth and direct path to “greater and greater demo- 
eracy,” as the Liberal professors and the lower middle class 
opportunists would have us believe. No, progressive develop- 
ment—that it, towards Communism-—-marches through the 
dictatorship of the proletariat ; and cannot do otherwise, for 
there is no one else who can break the resistance of the ex- 
pluiting capitalists, and no other way of doing it. 

And the dictatorship of the proletariat—that is, the organi- 
sation of the advance-guard of the oppressed as the ruling 
class, for the purpose of crushing the oppressors—cannot 
produce merely an expansion of democracy. Together with an 
immense expansion of democracy—for the first time becoming 
democracy for the poor, democracy for the people, and not 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 99 


democracy for the rich folk—the dictatorship of the proletariat 
will produce a series of restrictions of liberty in the case of the 
oppressors, exploiters and capitalists. We must crush them in 
order to free humanity from wage-slavery ; their rasistance 
must be broken by force. It is clear that where there is 
suppression there must also be violence, and there cannot be 
liberty or democracy. 


Engels expressed this splendidly in his letter to Bebel when 
he said, as the reader will remember, that “the proletariat needs 
the State, not in the interests of liberty, but for the purpose oi 
crushing its opponents ; and, when one will be able to speak 
of freedom, the State will have ceased to exist.” 

Democracy forthe vast majority of the nation, and the 
suppression by force—that is, the exclusion from democracy— 
of the exploiters and oppressors of the nation ; this is the modi- 
fication of democracy which we shall see during the transition 
from capitalism to Communism. 


Only in Communist society, when the resistance of the 
capitalists has finally been broken, when the capitalists have 
disappeared, when there are no longer any classes (that is, when 
there is no difference between the members of society in respect 
of their social means of production) only then “does the State 
disappear and one can speak of freedom.” Only 
then will be possible and will be realised a realiv full 
democracy, a democracy without any exceptions. And only 
then will democracy itseif begin to wither away in virtue of the 
simple fact that, freed from capitalist slavery, from the innnm- 
erable horrors, savagery, absurdities and infumies of eanitalist 
exploitation, people will gradually become accustomed to the 
observation of the elementary rules of social life, known for 
centuries, repeated for thousands of years in all sermons. They 
will become accustomed to their observance without force, 


100 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


without constraint, without subjection, without the special 
apparatus for compulsion which is called the State. 

The expression “the State withers away,” is very well 
chosen, for it indicates the gradual and elemental nature of the 
process. Only habit can, undoubtedly will, have such an effect. 
for we see around us millions of times how readily people get 
accustomed to observe the necessary rules of life in common, 
if there is no exploitation, if there is nothing that causes 
indignation, that calls forth protest and revolé and has to be 
suppressed. 

Thus, in capitalist society, we have a democracy that is 
curtailed, wretched, false; a democracy only for the rich, for 
the minority. The dictatorship of the proletariat, the period 
of transition to Cumumunism, will, for the first time, produce a 
democracy for the people, for the majority, side by side with 
the necessary suppression of the minority constituted by the 
exploiters. Commuuism alone is capable of giving a really 
complete democracy, and the fuller it is the more quickly will 
it become unnecessary and wither away of itself. In other 
words, under capitalism we have a State in the proper sense 
of the word : that is, a special instrument for the suppression 
of one class by another, and of the majority by the minority at 
that. Naturally, for the successful discharge of such a task 
as the systematic suppression by the minority of exploiters of 
the majority of exploited, the greatest ferocity and savagery of 
suppression is requird, and seas of blood are needed, through 
which humanity has to directits path, in a condition of slavery, 
seridom and wage labour. 

Again, during the transition from capitalism to Communism, 
suppression is still necessary ; but in this case it is suppression 
ofthe minority of exploiters by the majority of exploited. 
A special instrument, a special machine for suppression—that 
is, the “State”—is necessary, but this is now a transitional 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 101 


State, no longer a State in the ordinary sense of the term. For 
the suppression of the minority of exploiters, by the majority 
of those who were but yesterday wage slaves, is a matter 
comparatively so easy, simple and natural that it will cost far 
less bloodshed than the suppression of the risings of the slaves, 
serfs or wage labourers, and will cost the human race far 
Jess. Andit is compatible with the diffusion of democracy 
over such an overwhelming majority of the nation that the 
need for any special machinery for suppression will gradually 
cease to'exist. The exploiters are unable, of course, to suppress 
the people without a most complex machine for performing this 
duty ; but the people can suppress the exploiters even with a 
very simple “machine”—almost without any “machine” ut all, 
without any special spparatus—by the simple organisation of 
the armed masses (such as the Councils of Workers’ and 
Soldiers’ Deputies, we may remark, anticipating a little). 
Finally, only under Communism will the State become 
quite unnecessary, fur there will be no one to suppress— “no 
one” in the sense of a ciass, in the sense of a systematic struggle 
with a definite section of the population. We are not utopians, 
and we do not in the least deny the possibility and inevitability 
of excesses by individual persons, and equally the need to 
suppress such excesses. But, in the first place, for this no 
special machine, no special instrument of repression is needed. 
This will be done by the armed nation itself, as simply and as 
readily asany crowed of civilised people, even in modern society, 
parts a pair of combatants or does not allow a woman to be 
outraged. And, secondly, we know that the fundamental social 
cause of excesses which violate the rules of social life is the 
exploitation of the masses, their want and their poverty. With 
the removal of this chief cause, excesses will inevitably begin 
to “wither away.” We do not know how quickly and in what 
stages, but we know that they will be withering away. With 


102 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


their withering away, the State will also wither away. Marx, 
without pianging into Utopia, defined more fully what can ‘now 
be defined regarding this future epoch: namely, the difference 
between the higher and lower phases (degrees, stages) of commu- 
nist society. 


3. The First phase of Communist Society. 


In the “Criticism of the Gotha Progamme,” Marx disproves 
in detail the Lassallean idea of the receipt by the workers 
under Socialism of the “undiminished” or “full product of their 
labour.” Marx shows that out of the whole of the social labour 
of society, it will be necessary to deduct a reserve fund, a fund 
for the expansion of industry, the replacement of “worn-out” 
machinery, and so on; then, also, but of the collective product 
a fund for the expenses of management, for schools, hospitals, 
homes for the aged, and so forth. 

Instead of the hazy, obscure, general phrase of Lassalle 
—“the fuil product of his labour for the worker’—Marx gives 
a sober estimate as to how exactly a Socialist society will have 
to manage its affairs. Marx takes up a concrete analysis of the 
conditions of life of a society in which there willbe no capitalism, 
and says: “We have to deal here” (analysing the programme 
of the Party), “not with a Communist society which hus deve- 
loped on its own foundations, but with one which has just 
issued actually from capitalist society, and which, in conse- 
quence, in all respeets—economic, moral and intellectual—stil] 
bears the stamp of the old society, from the womb of which it 
came.” And it is this Communist socicty—a society which 
has just come into the world ont of the womb of capitalism, 
and which, in ull respects, bears the stamp of the old society — 
that Marx terms the first, or lower, phase of Communist 
‘society. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 103 


The means of production are now no longer the private 
-yroperty of individuals. The means of production belong to 
the whole of society. Every member of society, performing a 
a certain part of socially-necessary labour, receives a certificate 
from society that he has done such and such a quantity of 
work. According to this certificate, he receives from the 
public stores of acticles of consumption a corresponding quantity 
of products. After the deduction of that proportion of labour 
which goes to the public fund, every worker, therefore, receives 
from society as much as he has given it. 


+v 


“Equality” seems to reign supreme. But when Lassalle, 
-having in view such a social order (generally called “Socialism,” 
but termed by Marx the first phase of Communism) speaks of 
this as “just distribution,” and says that this is “the equal right 
of each to an equal share of the products of labour,” Lassalle 
is mistaken, and Marx explains his error. 


“Equa! vight [says Marx], we indeed have here ; but 
it is stil a ‘bouryeois right’ which, like every right, pre- 
supposes inequality. Every Tight’ is an application of the 
same measure to different people who, asa matter of fact, 
are not similar and are not equal to one another; and, 
therefore, ‘equal right’ is really a violation of equality, and 
an injustice. In effect, every man having done as much 
social labour as every other, receives an equal share of the 
social products (with the above-mentioned deduciious ). 
Notwithstanding this, different people are not equal to one 
another. One is strong, another is week ; one is married, 
the other is not. One has more children, another has less, 
and so on. ' 


“With equal labour [Marx concludes] and, therefore, 
with an equal share in the public stock of articles of 
consumption, one will, in reality, receive more than another, 


104 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


will find himself richer, and so on, To avoid all this, rights’, 

instead of being equal, should be unequal.” 

The first phase of Communism, therefore, still cannot produce 
justice and equality ; differences and unjust differences, in 
wealth will still exist, but the exploitation of one man by many 
will have become impossible, because it will be impossible to 
seize as private property the means of production, the factories, 
machines, land, and soon. While tearing to tatters Lassalle’s 
small bourgeois, confused phrase about “equality” and “justice” 
in general, Marx at the same time shows the line of develop- 
ment of Communist society, which is forced at first to destroy 
only the “injustice” that the means of production are in the 
hands of private individuals. It is not capable of destroying at 
once the further injustice which is constituted by the distri- 
bution of the articles of consumption according to “work 
performed” ‘and not according to need ). 

The vulgar economists, including the bourgeois professors 
(such as “our” Tugan-Baranowsky), constantly reproach the 
Socialists with forgetting the inequality of mankind and with 
“dreaming” of destroying this inequality. Such a reproach, 
as we see, only proves the extreme ignorance of the bourgeois 
ideologists. 

Marx not only, with the greatest care, takes into account 
the inevitable inequalities of men; he also takes cognisance 
of the fact that the mere conversion of the means of production 
into the common property of the whole of society—‘°Socialism” 
in the generally accepted sense of the word—does not remove 
the shortcomings of distribution and the inequality of 
“bourgeois justice,” which continue to exist as long as the 
products are divided according to the quantity of “work 
performed. ý 

“But these defects [Marx continues] are unavoidable 
in the first phase of Communist society, in the form in which 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 105 


it comes forth, after the prolonged travail of birth, from 

capitalist society. Justice can never be in advance of its 

stage of economic development, and of the cultural develop- 
ment of society conditioned by the latter.” 

And so, in the first phase of Communist society (generally 
called Socialism) “bourgeois justice is net abolished in its 
entirety, but only in part, only in proportion to the economic 
transformation so far attained, that is, only in respect of the 
means of production. “Bourgeois law” recognises them as the 
private property of separate individnals. Socialism converts 
them into common property, und to that extent. and only to 
that extent, does “bourgeois law” die out. Bat it continues to 
live as far as its other part is concerned, in the capacity of 
regulator or adjuster dividing labour and allotting the products 
amongst the members of society. 

“He who dors not work neither shall he eat”—this Socialist 
principle is already realised. “For an equal quantity of 
labour an equal quautity of produects’—this Socialist principle 
is also already realised. Nevertheless, thisis not yet Communism, 
and this does not abolish “bourgeois law,” which gives 
to unequal individuals, in return for an unequal (in reality) 
amount of work, an equal quantity of products. 


This is a “defect,” says Marx, but it is unavoidable during 
the first phase of Communism ; for, if we are not to land in 
Utopia, we cannot imagine that, having overthrown capitalism, 
people will at once learn to work for society without any 
regulations by law ; indeed, the abolition of capitalism does 
not immediately lay the economic foundations for sucha 
change. 

And there is no other standard yet than that of “bourgeois 
law.” To this extent, therefore, a form of State is still necessary, 
which, whilst maintaining the public ownership of the means 
of production, preserves the equality of labour and equality 


106 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


in the distribution of the products. The Stateis withering 
away in so far as there are no longer any capitalists, any 
classes, and, consegertly, any class whatever to suppress. But 
the State is not yet dead altogether, since there still remains 
the protection of “bourgeois law,’ which sanctifies actual 
inequality. For the complete extinction of the State complete 
Communism is necessary. 


4, The Highest Phase of Communist Society. 


Marx continues : 

“In the highest plase of Communist socicty, after the 
disappearance of the enslavement of man caused by his- 
subjection to the principle of division of labour; when, 
together with this, the opposition between brain and manual 
work will have disappeared ; when labour will have ceased 
to be a mere means of supporting life and will itself have 
become one of the first necessities of life ; when, with the 
all-round development of the individual, the productive 
forces, too, will have grown to maturity, and all the forces 
of social wealth will be pouring an uninterrupted torrent— 
only then will it be possible wholly to pass beyond the 
narrow horizon of bourgeois laws, and only then will society 
be able to inscribe on its banner: ‘From each according to 
his ability ; to each according to his needs’.” 

Only now can we appreciate the full justice of Engels’ 
observations when he mercilessly ridiculed all the absurdity 
of combining the words “freedom” and “State.” While the 
State exists there can be no freedom. When there is freedom 
there will be no State. : 

The economic basis for the complete withering awav of the 
State is that high stage of development of Communism when 
the distinction between brain and manual work disappears ; 
consequently, when one of the principal sources of modern 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 107 


social inequalities will have vanished—a, source, moreover, 
which it is impossible to remove immediately by the mere 
conversion of the means of production into public property, 
by ths mere expropriation of the capitalists. 

This expropriation wil! make it possible gigantically to 
develop the forces of production. And seeing how incredibly, 
even now, capitalism retards this development, how much 
progress could be made even on the basis of modern technique 
at the level it has reached, we havea right to say, with the 
fullest confidence, that the expropriation of the capitalists will 
result inevitably in a gigantic development of the ‘productive 
forces of human society. But how rapidly this development 
will go forward, how soon it will reach ,the point of breaking 
away from the divison of labour, of the destruction of the 
antagonism between brain and manual work, of the transfor- 
mation of work into a “first necessity of life’—this we do not 
and cannot know. 

Consequently, we are right in speaking solely of the inevi- 
table withering away of the State, emphasising the protracted 
nature of this process, and its denendence upon the rapidity 
of development of the higher phase of Communism ; leaving 
quite open the question of lengths of time, or the concrete forms 
of this withering away, since material for the solution of such 
questions is not available. 

The State will be able to wither away completely when 
society has realised the formula: “From each according to 
his ability; to each according to his needs”; that is, when 
_ people have become accustomed to observe the fundamental 
principles of social life, and their labour is so productive, that 
they will voluntarily work according to their abilities. “The 
narrow horizon of bourgeois law,” which compels one to 
calculate, with the pitilessness of a Shylock, whether one has 
not worked half-an-hour more than another, whether one is 


108 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


not getting less pay than another—this narrow horizon will 
then be left behind. There will then be no need for any exact 
calculation by society of the quantity of products to be distri- 
buted to each of its members ; each will take freely “according 
to his needs.” 

From the capitalist point of view, it is easy to declare such 
a social order “a pure Utopia,” and to snecr at the Socialists 
for promising each the right to receive from society, without 
any control of the labour of the individual citizens, any quantity 
of truffles, motor cars, pianos, and so forth. Even now, 
most bourgeois “savants” deliver themselves of such sneers, 
but thereby they only display at once their ignorance and their 
material interest in defending capitalism. Ignorance—for it 
has never entered the head of any Socialist “to promise” that 
the highest phase of Communism will actually arrive, while 
the anticipation of the great Socialists that it Will arrive, 
assumes neither the present productive power of labour, nor 
the present unthinking “man in the street” capable of spoiling, 
without reflection, the stores of social wealth and of demanding 
the impossible. As long as the “highest” phase of Communism 
has not arrived, the Socialists demand the strictest control, 
by society and by the State, of the quantity of labour and 
the quantity of consumption; only this control must start 
with the expropriation of the capitalists, with the control of 
the workers over the capitalists, and must be carried out, 
not by a government of bureaucrats, but by a government of 
the armed workers. 

The interested defence of capitalism by the capitalist 
ideologists (and their hangers-on like Tseretelli, Tchernoff 
and Co. } consists just in that they substitute their disputes 
and discussions about the far future for the essential, imperative 
questions of the day: the expropriation of the capitalists, 
the conversion of all citizens into workers and employees of 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 109 


one huge “syndicate’—the whole State—and the complete 
subordination ‘of the whole of the work of this syndicate to 
a really democratic State—to the State consisting of the 
Councils of Worker’s and Soldiers’ Deputies. In reality, 
when a learned professor, and in his train, some philistine, 
and in his wake, Messrs. Tseretelli and Tchernoff, talk of 
unredsonable Utopias, of the demagogic promises of the Bol- 
sheviks, of the impossibility of “bringing in” Socialism, it is 
the highest stage or phase of Comnomism which they have 
in mind, and which no one has. not only promised, but ever 
even thought of trying to “bring in,” because, in any case, it is 
altogether impossible to “bring it in.” 

And here we come to that question of the scientific difference 
between Socialism and Communism, upon which Engels 
touched in his discussion cited above on the incorrectness of 
the name “Social-Democrat.” The political difference between 
the first, or lower, and the higher phase of Communism will 
in time, no doubt, be tremendous; but it would be ridiculous 
to emphasise it now, under capitalism, and only, perhaps, some 
isolated anarchist could invest it with primary importance— 
that is, if there are still people amongst the anarchists who 
have learnt nothing from the Plekhanoff-like conversion of 
the Kropotkins, the Graves, the Cornelisens, and other 
“leading lights” of anarchism to Social-Chauvinism or 
Anarcho- Jusquauboutism” as one of the (few anarchists 
still preserving their honour (Gay) has expressed it. 

But the scientific difference between Socialism and Commu- 
nism is clear. That which is generally called Socialism is 
termed by Marx the first or lower phase of Communist society. 
In so far as the means of production become public property, 
the word Communism is also applicable here, providing that 
‘we do not forget that it is not full Communism. The great 
importance of Marx’s explanation is this: that here, too, he 


110 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


consistently applies materialist dialectics, the theory of 
evolution, looking upon Communism as something which 
evolves out of canitalism. 

Instead of artificially elaborate and scholastic definitions 
and profitless disquisitions on the meanings of words (“what 
Socialism is,” “what Communism is”), Marx gives us an. 
analysis of what may be called the stages in the economic 
growth of Communism. 

In its first phase or first stage Communism cannot as yet 
be economically mature and quite free of all tradition and of 
all taint of capitalism. Hence we see the interesting phenome- 
non of the first phase of Communism retaining “the narrow 
horizon of bourgeois law.” Bourgeois law, in respect of the 
distribution of articles of consumption, presupposes inevitably 
the capitalist State, for law is nothing without the organisation 
for farcing people to obey it. Consequently, fora certain time 
not only bourgeois law. but even the capitalist State may 
remain under Communism without the capitalist class. 

This may appear to some a paradox, a piece of intellectual 
subtlety of which Marxism is often accused by people who 
would not put themselves out to study its extraordinarily 
profound teachings. But, asa matter of fact, the Old surviv- 
ing in the New confronts usin life at every step in nature: 
as well as in Society. It is not Marx’s own sweet will which 
smuggled a scrap of bourgeois law into Communism; he 
simply indicated what is economically and politically 
inevitable in a society issuing from the womb of capita- 
lism. | 

Democracy is of great importance in the working class strug- 
gle for freedom against the capitalists. But democracy is ‘not a 
limit one may not overstep ; it is merely one of the stages in the- 
course of development from feudalism to capitalism, and from 
capitalism to communism. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 111 


. Democracy implies equality. The immense significance of 
the struggle of the proletariat for equality and the power of 
attraction of such a battle-cry are obvinus, if we but rightly 
interpret it as meaning the annihilation of classes. But the 
equality of democracy is formal equality—no more; and 
immediately after the attainment of the equality of all mem- 
bers of society in respect of the ownership of the means of 
production, that is, of equality of labour and equality of wages, 
there will inevitably arise before humanity the question of 
‘going further from equality which is formal to equality 
which is real, and of realising fn life the formula “From 
each according to his ability ; to each according to his needs.” 
By what stages, by means of what practical measures huma- 
nity will proceed to this higher aim—this we do not and cannot 
know. But it is important that one should realise how infinitely 
mendacious is the usual capitalist representation of Socialism as 
something lifeless, petrified, fixed once for al]. In reality, it is 
only wiih Socialism that there will commence a rapid, genuine, 
real mass advance. in which first the majority and than the whole 
of the population will take part—an advance in all domains of 
social and individual life. 

Democracy isa form of the State—one of the varieties of 
the State, and, consequently, like every State, it stands as an 
organised, systematic application of force against mankind, 
That is its one aspect. But, on the other band it is the form- 
al recognition of the equality of all citizens, the equal right 
of all to determine the structure and ‘administration of the 
State. Out of this formal recognition there arises, in its 
turn, a stage in the development of democracy, when it first 
rallies the proletariat asa revolutionary class against capita- 
lism, and gives it an opportunity to crush, to break to atoms, 
to wipe off the face of the earth the capitalist government 
machine—even. the republican variety: the standing army, 


112 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


police, and bureaucracy. Second, it enables it to substitute for 
all this a more democratic, but still a State machinery in the 
shape of armed masses of the working class, which then be- 
come transformed into a universal participation of the people 
in a wilitia. 

Here “quantity passes into quality.” Such a degree of 
democracy carries with it the abandonment of the framework 
of capitalist society, and the beginning of its Socialist recons- 
truction. If everyone really takes partin the administration 
of the State, capitalism, cannot retain its hold. As a matter 
of fact, capitalism, as it develops, itself prepares the ground 
for everyone to be able really to take part in the administration 
of the State. 

We may class as part of this preparation of the ground the 
universal literacy of the population, already realised in most of 
the more progresive capitalist countries, then the education 
and discipline inculcated upon millions of workers by the huge, 
complex, and socialised apparatus of the post, railways, big 
factories, large-scale commerce, banking and so on, and 
so forth. 2 y 

With such an economic groundwork it is quite possible, 
immediately, within twenty-four hours, to pass to the overthrow 
of the capitalists and bureaucrats, and to replace them, in the 
sontrol of production and distribution, in the business of 
apportioning labour and products, by the armed workers, or 
the people in arms. The question of control and book-keeping 
must not be confused with the question of the scientifically 
educated staff of engineers, agriculturists and so on. These 
gentlemen work to-day owing allegiance to the capitalists: they 
will work even better tomorrow, owing it to the armed workers. 
Book-keeping and control—these are the chief things necessary 
for the smooth and currect functioning of the first phase of 
Communist society. All the citizens are here transformed into 


t 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 113 


he hired employees of the State, which then is the armed 
vorkers. All the citizens become the employees and workers 
yf one national State “syndicate.” It simply resolves itself 
nto a question of all working to an equal extent, of all carrying 
yut regularly the measure of work apportioned to them, and of 
all receiving equal pay. 


The book-keeping and control necessary for this have been 
simplified by capitalism to the utmost, till they have become 
the extraordinarily simple operations of watching, recording and 
issuing receipts, within the reach of anybody who can read and 
write and knows the first four arithmetical rales When the 
majority of the citizens themselves begin everywhere to keep 
such accounts and maintain such contro! over the capitalists, 
now converted into employees, and over the intellectual gentry, 
who still retain capitalist habits, this contro! will, indeed, become 
universal, pervading, rational: it will be ubiquitious, and there 
will be no way of escaping it. 

The whole of society will have become one office and one 
factory, with equal work and equal pay. But this “factory” 
discipline, which the proletariat will extend to the whole of 
society on the defeat of capitalism and the overthrow of the 
exploiters, is by no means our ideal, and is tar from our final 
aim. Itis but a foothold as we press on to the radical cleans- 
ing of society from all the brutality and foulness of capitalist 
exploitation: we leave it behind as we move on. 

When all, or be iteven only the greater part of society, 
have learnt how to govern the State, have taken this business 
into their own hands, have established a control over the 


* When most of the functions of the State are reduced to this 
book-keeping and control by the workers themselves it ceases to be a 
“political” State. Then “the public functions ate converted from 
political into simple administrative functions” (cf. above, chap. [V par. 
2, on the dispute of Engels with the anarchists ). 


114 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


insignificant minority of capitalists, over the gentry with capita- 
‘list leanings, and workers thoroughly demoralised by capitalism 
from this moment the need for any government begins to 
vanish. The more complete the democracy, the nearer the 
moment when it ceases to be necessary. The more democratic 
the “State” consisting of armed workers, which is “no longer 
really a State in the ordinary sense of the term,” the more 
rapidly does every form of the State begin to decay. For 
when all have learnt to manage, and really do manage, socialised 
production, when all really do keep account and control of the 
idlers, gentlefolk, swindlers and such like “guardians of capita- 
list traditions,” the escape from such general registration and 
control will inevitably become so increasingly difficult, so much 
the exception, and will probably be accompanied by such swift 
and severe punishment (for the armed workers are very 
practical people, not sentimental intellectuals, and they will 
scarcely allow anyone to trifle with them ), that very soon the 
necessity of observing the simple, fundamental rules of any kind 
of social life will become a habit. The door will then be wide 
open for the transition from the first phase of Communist society 
to its second higher phase, and along with it to the complete 
withering away of the State. | 


ë 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE VULGARISATION OF MARX BY THE 
CPPORTUNISTS. 


The question of the relation of the State to the Social 
Revolution, and of the Social Revolution to the State, like 
the question of revolution generally, occupied very little the 
best known theoreticians of the Second International {1889- 
1914) But the most characteristic thing in that process of 
the gradual growth of opportunism, which led to the collapse 
of the Second International in 1914, is this, that even when 
they actually came into contact with this question they did 
their best to evade it or else passed it by unnoticed. 

It may, in general, be said that the evasiveness on this 
question of the relation of the proletarian revolution to the 
State, an evasiveness which was both convenient to the oppor- 
tunists and bred and fed them—resulted in a distortion of 
Marxism and in its complete vulgarisation, 

To characterise, if only in brief, this lamentable process, let 
us take the best-known theoreticians of Marxism: Piekhanoff 
and Kautsky. 


1. The Controversy between Plekhanoff and the 
Anarchists. 


Plekhanoif devoted a special pamphlet to the question of 
the relation of Socialism to anarchism entitled “Anarchism and 
Socialism,” published in German in 1894. He managed some- 
how to treat this question without touching on the most vital, 
controversial point, the essential point politically, in the 
struggle with the anarchists: the relation of the revolution to 


116 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the State, and the question of the State in general. His 
pamphlet may be divided into two parts : one, historico-literary, 
containing valuable material for the history of the ideas of 
Stirner, Proudhon and others ; the second, ignorant and narrow- 
minded, containing a clumsy disquisition on the theme “that an 
anarchist cannot be distinguished from a bandit,” an amusing 
combination of subjects and most characteristic of the entire 
activity of Plekhanoff on the eve of revolution and during the 
revolutionary period in Russia, Indeed, in the years 1908 to 
1917, Plekhanoff showed himself to be half doctrinnaire and 
half philivtine, walking politically in the wake .of the 
bourgeoisie. 

We saw how Marx and Engels, in their polemics against 
the anarchists, explained most thoroughly their views on the 
relation of the revolution to the State. Engels, when editing in 
1891 Marx’s “Criticism of the Gotha Programme,” wrote that 
“we"—that is, Engels and Marx—“were then in the fiercest 
phase of our battle with Bakunin and his anarchists : hardly 
two years had then passed since the Hague Congress of the 
International” (the First). The anarchists had tried to claim 
the Paris Commune as their “own”, as a confirmation of their 
teachings, thus showing that they had not inthe least understood 
the lessons of the Commune or the analysis of those lessons by 
Marx. Anarchism has given nothing approaching a true solu- 
tion of the concrete political problems : are we to break up the 
old State machine, and what shall we put in its place ? 

But to speak of “Anarchism and Socialism”, leaving the whole 
question of the State out of account and taking no notice at 
all of the whole development of Marxism before and after the 
Commune—that meant an inevitable fall into the pit of oppor- 
tunism. For that is just what opportunism wants—to keep 
these two questions in abeyance. To secure this is, in itself, a 
victory for opportunism. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION lif 


2. Kautsky’s Controversy with the Opportunists. 


Undoubtedly an immeasurably larger number of Kautsky’s 
works have been translated into Russian than into any other 
language. It is not withont some justification that German 
Social-Democrats make sometimes the joke that Kautsky is 
more read in Russia than in Germany—and we may say, in 
parentheses, that there is deeper historical significance in this 
joke than those who first made it suspected. For in 1905 the 
Russian workers manifested an extraordinarily strong, an 
unexampled demand for the best works the best Social- 
Democratic literature in the world, and translations and editions 
of these works appearcd in quantitiss unheard of in ather 
countries. Thereby with one sweep the immense experience 
of the neighbouring. more advanced, country, was trans- 
plunted on to the almost virgin soil of our proletarian 
movement. 


Besides his popularisation of Marxism, Kautsky is parti- 
cularly well known in our country by his controversies with 
the opportunists, with Bernstein at their head. But one fact 
is almost unknown, which, however, cannot be passed over if 
we are.to apply ourselves to the task of investigating how it 
was that Kautsky rolled down into the disgraceful morass of 
confusion and defence of social chauvinism at the time of 
greatest crisis in 1914-15. This fact is that before he came for- 
ward against the best known representatives of opportunism 
in France ( Millerand, Jaure’s ), and Germany ( Bernstein ), 
Kautsky had shown very great vacillation. 

The Russian Marxist journal, “The Dawn,” which was 
published at Stuttgart in 1901-2, and advocated revolutionary 
proleterian doctrines, had to call Kautsky to account, denounc- 
ing his resolution at the Paris International Socialist Congress 
of 1900 as a “piece of elastic,” because of its evasive, temporis- 


118 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


ing and conciliatory attitude towards the opportunists. Letters 
nave been published from Kautsky’s pen in Germany revealing 
no less hesitancy before he took the field against Bernstein. 
Of immeasurably greater importance, however, is the circums- 
tance that, in his very debates with the opportunists, in his 
formulation of the question and his method of treating it, we 
can observe now that we are investigating the history of his 
latest betrayal of Marxism, his systematic gravitation towards 
opportunism, and that precisely on this question of the State. 

Let us take Kautsky’s first big work against opportunism : 
“Berustein and the Social-Democratic Programme.” Kautsky 
refutas Bernstein in detail: but the characteristic thing about 
itis this: Bernstein, in his famous, or infamous, “Socialist 
Fundamentals,” accuses Marxism of Blanquism, an accusation 
since repeated thousdnds of times by the opportunists and 
liberals of Russia against the representatives of revolutionary 
Marxism, the Bolsheviks. In this connection Bernstein 
dwells particularly on Marx’s “Civil War in France,” and 
tries—as we saw, quite unsuccessfully—to identify Marx’s 
view of the lessons of the Commune with that of Proudhon. 
He also pays particular attention to Marx’s conclusion, empha- 
sised by him in his preface of 1872 to the “Communist Mani- 
festo” to the effect that “the working class cannot simply lay 
hold of the ready-made State machine, and set it going for its 
own purposes.” The dictum pleased Bernstein so much that 
he repeated it no less than three times in his book—interpret- 
ing it in the most disorted opportunist sense. We have seen 
what Marx means—that the working class must shatter, break 
up, blow up (sprengen, explode, is the expression used by 
Engels) the whole State machine: whereas according to 
Bernstein it would appear as though Marx by these words warned 
the working class against -excessive revolutionary zeal when 
‘seizing power. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 119 


One cannot imagine a more vulgar and discreditable per- 
wersion of Marx’s ideas. How, then, did Kautsky act in bis 
‘detailed refutation of Bernsteinism ? 

He avoided the examination of the entire enormity of the 
nerversion of Marxism on this point. He cited the above-quoted 
passage from Engels’ preface to Marx’s “Civil Warin Franee.” 
saying that, according to Marx. the working class cannot simply 
take possession‘on the ready-made State machine, but, generally 
speaking, it can take possession of it—and that is all......: s for 
the fact that Bernstein attributed to Marx the direct oppnsite 
of the latter’s real views, and that the real task of the prole- 
tarian revolution, as formulated by Marx ever since 1852, was 
the shattering of the State machine—not a word of all this is 
-to be found in Kautsky. The result was that the most impor- 
tant distinction between Marxism and opportunism on the 
‘question of the proletarian revolution was glossed over! 
“The solution of the problem of the proletarian dictatorship,” 
wrote Kautsky, “in opposition”? to Bernstein, “we can safely 
leave to the future,” (p. 172, German edition). 

This is not a polemic against Bernstein, but really a conces- 
sion to him, a surrender of the position to opportunism : for at 
present the opportunists ask nothing better than “safely to 
leave to the future” all the fundamental questions of the prole- 
tarian revolution. 

Marx and Engels, from 1852 to 1891—for forty years—had 
taught the proletariat that it must break the State machine ; 
but Kautsky, in 1899, confronted on this point with the complete 
betrayal of Marxism by opportunists, fraudulently substitutes 
the questions as to the concrete forms of the destruction of the 
State mschine in the place of the more general one about the 
necessity of destroying it, and then saves himself behind the 
screen of the “indisputable”—and barren—truth, that conerete 
forms cannot be known in advance... 


120 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


Between Marx and Kautsky, between their respective 
attitudes to the problem before the proletarian party as to how 
to prepare the working class ior revolution, there is a 
wide abyss. 

Let us take the next, more mature, work by Kantsky, also 
devoted, to a large extent, to a refutation of opportunist 
errors. This is his pamphlet on the “Social Revolution.” The 
author chose here as his special theme the question of “the 
proletarian revolution” and the “proletarian regime.” He gave 
us here much valuable matter ; but just this question of the State 
was ignored. Throughout the pamphlet the author speaks of 
the conquest of the power of tha State—and that is all. That 
is to say, the question is so formulated as to constitute a conce- 
ssion to opportunism, since the possibility of the conquest of 
power is admitted without the destruction of the State Machine. 
The very thing which Marx, in 1872, had declared to be out of 
date in the programme of the “Communist Manifesto” is revived 
by Kautsky in 1902! 

The pamphlet also contains a special paragraph on “the 
forms and weapons of the social revolution.” Here he treats. 
of the general political strike, of the question of civil war, and 
of “the instruments of force at the disposal of the modern large 
States such as the bureaucracy and the Army” ; but of that 
which the Commune had already taught the workers, not a 
syllable. Evidently Engels had issued no idle warning, for the 
German Social-Democrats particularly, against “superstitious 
reverence” for the State. 

Kautsky propounds the matter thus : the victorious prole- 
tariat “will realise the democratic programme,” and he formula- 
tes its clauses ; but of what the year 18/1 has taught us about 
the middle class democracy being replaced by a proletarian 
one—not a word. He disposes of the question by such plausible 
as : “It is obvious that we shall not attain supremacy under bana- 


& 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 121 


lities the present order of things. Revolution itself presupposes a 
prolonged and far-reaching struggle which as it proceeds, will 
change our political and social structure.” 

“Obvious” this undoubtedly is: as much as that horses eat 
oats, or the Volga flows into the Caspian Sea. The only pity is 
that he shonld use this empty and bombastic phrase “far-reach- 
ing” to slur over the essential question for the revolutionary 
proletariat as to wherein exactly lies this “far-reaching” nature 
of its revolution in respect of the State and democracy, as dis- 
tinguished from the non-proletarian revolutions of the past. 

Here is a most important point, by ignoring which Kautsky, 
in point of fact, gives over the . whole position to the oppor- 
tunists, whilst declaring war against them in awe-inspiring 
words, emphasising the importance of the “idea of revolution” — 
how much is this “idea” worth, if one is afraid to propagate it 
among the workers ?—or “revolutionary idealism above all......,” 
declaring that the English workers represent now little more 
than a lower middle class...... 

“In a Socialist society [Kautsky writes] there can exist, 
side by side, the most varied forms of industrial underta- 
kings—bureaucratie |? ? ] trade unionist, co-operative, in- 
dividual.” “There are, for instance, such enterprises as 
cannot do without a bureaucratic [??] organisation : such 
are the railways. Here democratic organisation might take 
the following form : The workers elect delegates, who form 
something in the nature of a parliament, and this parliament 
determines the conditions of work, and _ superintends 
the management of the bureaucratic apparatus. Other 
enterprises might be handed over to the workers’ unions, 
which again could be organised on a co-operative basis.” 
This view is erroneous, and represents a step backward by 

comparison with the deductions of Marx and Engels in the 
’seventies from the example of the Commune. 


122 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


So far as this assumed necessity of “bureaucratic” organisa- 
tion is concerned, there is no difference whatever between 
railways and any other form of big industry, any factory, great 
commercial undartakiug or extensive capitalist farm. The 
conduct of all such enterprises reqnires the strictest discipline, 
the nicest accuracy in the apportionment of the work, under 
peril of damage to mechanism or nroduct, or even the confusion 
and stoppage of the whole business. In such enterprises the 
works will, of course. “choose delegates who will form something 
in the nature of a parliament.” 

But herein lies the crux : this “something in the nature of a 
parliament” will not be a parliament in the middle class sense. 
Kantsky’s ideas do not go beyond the boundaries of middle 
class parliamentarism. “This something in the nature of a 
parliament” will not merely “determine the conditions of work, 
and superintend the management of the bureaucratic apparatus,” 
as imagined by Kautsky. In a Socialist society, this something 
in the nature of a parliament,” consisting of workers’ delegates, 
will determine the conditions of work, and superintend the 
management of the “apparatus’—but this apparatus will not be 
“bureaucratic.” The workers, having conquered political power, 
will break up the old bureaucratic apparatus, they will shatter 
it from its foundations up, until not one stone is left standing 
upon another ; and the new machine which they will fashion to 
take its place will be found out of these same workers and 
employees themselves. To guard against their transformation 
into bureaucrats, measures will be taken at once, which have 
been analysed in detail by Marx and Engels: (1) Not only will 
they be elected, but they will be subject to recall at any time. 
(2) They will receive payment no higher than that of ordinary 
workers, (3) There will be an immediate preparation for a 
state of things when all shall fulfil the function of control and 
superintendance, so that all shall become “bureaucrats” for a 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 123 


time, and no one should, therefore, have the opportunity of 
becoining “bureaucrats” at ail. 

Kautsky has not reflected at all on Marx’s eng : “The 
Commune was not a parliamentary, but a working corporation, 
at one and the same time making the laws and executing them.” 
He has not in the least uuderstood the difference between a 
middie class parliament combining democracy (not for the 
people) with bureaucracy (against the people), and proletarian 
democracy, which will take immediate steps to cut bureaucracy 
down at the roots, and which will be abie to carry out measures 
to their logical conclusion, to the complete destruction of 
bureaucracy and the final cstgblishment of democracy for the 
people. Kautsky reveals here again the same old “sunersitious 
respect” for the State. and “supersitious faith” in bureaucracy. 

Let us pass to the last and best of Kautsky’s works against 
the opportunists, his pamphlet, “The Road to Power,” published 
in 1909. This pamphlet constitutes a considerable step in 
advance inasmuch as it does not treat of the revolutionary 
programme in general (as in the book of 1899 against Bernstein), 
nor of the problems of a social revolution independently of the 
time of its occurrence (as in the pamphlet “The’ Social Revolu- 
tion,” of 1902), but of the concrete conditions which compel us 
to recognise that the revolutionary era is approaching. 

The author distinctly points out the intensification of class 
antagonisms in general and the growth of imperialism, which 
plays a particularly important part in this connection. After 
the “revolutionary period of 1789-1871” in Western Europe, an 
analogous period begins for the East in 1905. A world war is 
coming nearer with threatening rapidity. “The proletariat can 
no longer talk of a “premature revolution”. We have entered 
upon a revolutionary period.” “The revolutionary era is 
beginning.” 

These declarations are perfectly clear. The pamphlet’ offers 


124 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


us a measure of comparison between the high promise of 
German Social-Democracy before the imperialist war and the 
depth of degradation to which it fell—carrying with it Kautsky 
himself—when the war broke out. “The present situation,” 
Kautsky wrote in the pamphlet under review, “contains this 
danger, that we, the German Social-Democracy, may easily be 
considered more moderate than we are in reality.” But when 
it came to the test, the German Social-Democratic Party turned 
out even more moderate and opportunist than it had seemed. 
It is the more characterstic that, side by side with such definite 
declarations regarding the revolutionary era already upon us 
Kautsky, in the pamphlet which: he says himself is devoted to 
precisely the “political revolution,” again quite passes over the 
question of the State. 

The some total of these evasions of the Subject, omissions 
and shufilings inevitably led to that complete surrender. to 
opportunism of which we shall soon have to speak. 

German Social-Democracy, as it were, in the person of 
Kautsky, declared : I still uphold revolutionary views (1899) ; 
Į recognise, in particular, the inevitability of the social revolu- 
tion of the proletariat (1902), I recognise that a new revolution- 
ary era is upon us (1909): still I disivow that which Marx said 
so early as 1852—if once the question is definitely raised as to 
the tasks confronting a proletarian revolution in respect to the 
State (1913). 

It was precisely in this bald form that the question was put 
in the debate with Panuekoek. 


3. The Debate between Kautsky and Pannekoek. 


Pannekoek came out against Kautsky as one of the 
representatives of the “Left Radical” grgup, which counted in 
its ranks Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Radek, and others, which, 
while upholding revolutionary tactics, was united in the convic- 


~*~ 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 125 


tion that Kantsky wat passing over to a “central” position, 
wavering, without principle, between Marxism and opportunism. 
The correctness of this view has been fully proved by the war, 
when this “central” current of Kautskianism, wrongly called 
Marxist, revealed itself in all its pitifull helplessness. 

In an article touching on the question of the State, entitied 
“Mass Action and revolution,” (“Neue Zeit,” 1912 xxx., 2), 
Pannekoek characterised Kautsky’s position as an attitude of 
“passive radicalism,” as “a theory of inactive expectancy.” 
“Kautsky does not want to see the process of revolution’ 
(p. 616). In treating this subject, Pannekock approached the 
problem which interests us, for the tasks of a proletarian revolu- 
tion in relation to the State. 

“The struggle of the proletariat [he wrote} is not merely 

a struggle against the capitalist class to control the state, but 

a struggle against the State... The essence of a proletarian 

revolution is the destruction of the organised forces of the 

State, and their forcible suppression (“ablosung”) by the 
‘ organised forces of the proletariat.... Until the entire State 

organisation’is destroyed, the struggle will not end. That is 

its aim. The organisation of the majority demonstrates its 
superiority by destroying the organised force of the ruling 

minority” (p. 548) 

Pannekoek did not expound his ideas very skilfully, but the 
ideas are sufficiently clear; and it is interesting to note how 
Kavtsky combatted them. “Up till now,” he wrote, the 
difference between Social-Democrats and anarchists has 
consisted in this: the first desired to conquer the Strate 
authority, while the anarchists’ aim was to destroy it: 
Pannekoek wants to do both” (p. 124). If Pannekoek’s exposi- 
tion lacks precision and concreteness—not to speak of other 
defects which have no bearing on the present subject—Kautsky 
seized on just that one point in Pannekoek’s article which is- 


126 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the essence of the whole matter; and on this fundamental 
question of principle Kautsky forsakes the Marxian position 
entirely and surrenders himself without reserve to the opportu- 
nists. His definition of the difference between Social-Democrats. 
and anarchists is absolutely wrong ; and Marxism is finally vul- 
garised and distorted. 

This is what the difference between the Marxists and 
anarchists is: (1) The Marxists aim at the complete destruc- 
tion of the State, but recognise that this aim is only attainable 
after the extinction of classes by a Socialist revolution as the 
result of the establishment of Socialism, leading to the withering 
away of the State. The anarchists, on the other hand, want 
the complete destruction of the State within twenty-four hours, 
and do not understand the conditions under which alone such a 
destruction can be carried out. (2) The Marxists recognise 
that when once the proletariat has won political power it must 
utterly break up the old machinery of the State, and substitute 
for it a new machinery of organised armed workers after the 
. type of the Commune. Anarchists on the other hand, while 
advocating the destruction of the State, have no clear idea as to 
what the proletariat will put in its place and how it will use its 
revolutionary power; they even deny that the revolutionary 
proletariat has any necessity to make use of the State and to 
establish its revolutionary dictatorship. (3) Marxists insist 
upon making use of the modern State asa means of preparing 
the workers for revolution, anarchist reject all this, 

In this controversy it is Pannekoek, not Kautsky who re- 
presents Marxism, seeing that it was Marx himself who taught 
that the mere’ transference of the-State machine into new 
hands is no conquest of power at all: the proletariat must 
smash up this apparatus and replace it by something altoge- 
ther new. Kautsky rats from Marxism to the opportunists, 
because, under his hands, this destruction of the State, which is. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 127° 


utterly repugnant to the opportunists, completely disappears. 
Nothing remains but an opportunist loophole in his interpreta- 
tiou of “conquest” as the gaining of a majority. 

In order to cover up his distortion of Marsism, Kautsky 
radiates erudition, offering us “quotations” from Marx himself. 
Marx wrote in 1850 of the necessity of “a decisive centralisa- 
tion of force in the hands of the State”; and Kantsky trium- 
phantly asks: Does Pannekoek want to destroy ‘Centraliin ? 
This is nothing but a conjuring trick. It is the same sort of 
thing as Bernstein’s identification of the views of Marx and 
Proudhon on Federation versus Centralism. 

Kautsky’s “quotation” is neither here nor there. The new 
form of the State admits Centralism as much as the oid; if the 
workers voluntarily unify their armed forces, this will be centra- 
lism : but it will be based on the complete destruction of 
centralised government apparatus—the army, pdlice, bureau- 
cracy. Kautsky’s behaviour is certainly not honest here; the 
well-known dissertations of Marx and Engels on the Commune 
are ignored in favour of a quotation which has no relevance 
at all. i 

“Perhaps Pannekoek wants to destroy the State func- 
tions of the officials? [Kautsky continues]. But we can- 
not do without officials even in our party and trade union 
organisations, much less in the State administration. For 

State officials our programme demands, not annihilation, 

but election by the people. It isnot a question as to the 

precise form which the administrative apparatus will take in 
the future State, but as to whether our political struggle 
destroys (literally : dissolves, “auflost”) the State before we 
have conquered it [Kautsky’s black type]. What Ministry 
with its officials, could be destroyed ? [Here follows an en- 
umeration of the Ministries of Education, Justice, Finance 
and War]. No, not one of the present Ministries will be 


128 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


abolished in our political struggles against the Government 

..[ repeat, to avoid misunderstanding, it is not hère a 

question as to what form a victorious Social-Democracy will 

give to the ‘future State, but as to how our opposition 

changes the present State” (p. 725). 

This is an obvious trick : Revolution was the question 
Pannekoek raised. Both the title of his article and the passages 
quoted above clearly enough show that. But Kautsky shifts 
and changes the point of view from one of revolution to one 
of opportunism, when he jumps over to the question of “oppo- 
sition.” According to him, we must for the present confine 
ourselves to opposition ; after we have won power we can have 
a talk about other things. The revolution has vanished : that 
is precisely what the opportunists wanted. 

Opposition and general political struggle is beside the point ; 
‘we are concerhed with the revolution. And revolution is when 
the administrative apparatus and the whole -machinery of 
government are destroyed, and a new proletarian power of the 
armed workers has filled their place. 

Kautsky reveals a “superstitious respect” for the 
Ministries : but why cannot they be replaced, say by committees 
of specialists working under sovereign all-powerful councils of 
workers’ and soldiers’ delegates ? The essence of the matter is 
not at all whether the Ministries shall remain or be turned into 
committees of specialists or any other kind of institution ; all 
this is quite unimportant. The main thing is. whether we are 
still to have the old machinery of government, saturated through 
and through with routine and inertia, and connected by thou- 
sands of threads with the capitalist class ; or shall it be broken 
up and replaced by something altogether new? The essence 
of revolution is not that a new class shall govern by means of 
the old governmental machinery, but that it shall smash up this 
machinery and govern by means of a new machine. 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 129 


This is a fundamental idea of Marxism, which Kautsky 
eithér conceals or has not understood at all. This question of 
his about officials makes it plain how little he has understood 
the lessons of the Commune or the teachings of Mars. “We 
cannot do without officials even in our party and trade union 
organisation” —we cannot do without officials under capitalism,” 
the domination of the middle class. The proletariat is oppressed, 
the labouring masses are enslaved by capitalism ; democracy is 
narrowed, crushed, curtailed, mutilated by capitalism, wage- 
slavery, the poverty and misery of the masses. It is precisely 
the conditions of life under capitalism which are the cause, and 
there is no other, why the officials of our political parties and 
trade unions are corrupt—or, rather, have the tendency to be- 
come corrupt, to become bureaucrats, that is, privileged 
persons detached from the masses, and standing above it. 
That is just the essence of bureaucracy, and until the capitalists 
have been expropriated and the bourgeoisie overthrown, noth- 
ing can prevent even workers’ officials from being to some extent 
“pureaucratised.” 

From what Kautsky says, one might think that a Socialism 
with elected employees would still tolerate bureaucrats and 
bureaucracy. That is the grand falsehond. Marx took the 
example of the Commune to show that under Socialism the 
workers’ employees will cease to be “bureaucrats” and “ officials” 
—especially when election is supplemented by the right of 
immediate recall ; still more, when their pay is brought down 
to the level of the pay of the average worker ; and still 
more again, when parliamentary institutions are replaced 
by “working bodies which both make and apply the laws.” 

All Kautsky’s arguments against Pannekock, and particu- 
larly his triumphant point that we cannot do witbout officials 
even in our parties and trade unions, show nothing so much as 
that Kautsky has adopted the old “arguments” of Bernstein 


130 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


avainst Marxism itself. 'Bernstein’s rencgade book, “Socialist 
Fundamentals,” is an attack on “primitive” democracy— “doc- 
trinnaire democracy” as he calls it—on imperative mandates, 
functionaries who receive no remuneration, tnportant central 
representative bodies, and so on. British trade union experience, 
as interpreted by the Webbs, is Bernstein’s proof of how unten- 
able “primitive democracy” is. Seventy odd years of develop- 
ment “in absolute freedom” (p. 137, German edition), have, 
forsooth, convinced the trade unions that. primitive democracy 
is useless, and led them to replace it by ordinary parliamentarism 
combined with bureaucracy. 

But the “absolute freedom” in which the trade unions deve- 
loped was in reality complete capitalist enslavement under 
which—what more natural ?—“one cannot do without” conce- 
ssions to the evil power of force and falshood by which the 
“lower” orders are excluded from the affairs of the “higher” 
administration. 

Under Socialism much of the primitive democracy will inevi- 
tably be revived. For the first time in the history of civilised 
nations, the mass of the population will rise, beyond voting and 
elections, to a direct control of the every-day administration of 
the affairs of the nation. Under Socialism, all will take a turn 
in management, and will soon become accustomed to the idea of 
no managers at all. 

Marx’s wandertful critico-analytical mind perceive that the 
practical measures of the Commune contained that revolution- 
ary departure of which the opportunists are afraid, and 
which they do not want to recognise, out of cowardice, out of 
reluctance to break irrevocably with the bourgeoisie; and 
which the anarchists do not want to perceive either through 
haste or a general want of comprehension of the conditions of 
great social transformations. “One must not even think of 
such a.thing as the break up of the old machinery of govern- 


e 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 131 


ment, for bow shall we do without ministries and without 
officials ?”—thus argues the opportunist, staturated through 
and through with philistinism, and in reality not merely bereft 
of taith in revolution, in the creative power of revolution but 
actually in deadly fear of it {like our Social-revolutionaries 
and Mensheviks). “One must only think of the destruction 
of the old machinery of government: never mind searching 
for concrete lessons im earlier proletarian revolutionary 
movements, or analysing by what and how to replace what 
has been destroyed” :—thus argues the anarchist : that is, 
the best of the anarchists, not those who followed, with 
Kropotkin and Co., in the train of the bourgeoisie; and 
consequently, the tactics of the anarchist become the tactics 
of despair instead of a revolutionary grappling with con- 
crete problems—ruthless, courageous and at the same 
time, cognisant of the conditions under which the masses 
progress. ) : 
Marx teaches us to avoid both classes of error. He teaches 
us dauntless courage to destroy the old machinery of govern- 
ment, and at the same time shows us how to put the question 
concretely: The Commune was able, within afew weeks, to 
start the building of a new proletarian State machinery by 
introducing the measures indicated above to secure a wider 
democracy, in which bureaucracy should be uprooted. Let us 
learn revolutionary courage from the Communards. In their 
practical measures we can see an indication of practical, 
everyday and immediately possible measures : itis along such 
a path that we shall arrive at the complete destruction of bureau- 
cracy. ; 
It can be destroyed. When Socialism has shortened the 
working day, raised the masses to a new life, created such 
conditions for the majority of the population as to enable every- 
body, without exception, to perform the functions of govern- 


132 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


ment, then every form of the State will completely wither 
away. 

“To destroy the State [Kautsky wrote] can never be the 
object of a general stnke, but only to wring concessions from 
the government on some particular question, or to replacea 
hostile government by one willing to meet the proletariat half 
way... But never, under no conditions, can it [a proletarian 
victory over a hostile government] legd to the destruction of the 
State. dt can lead only to a certain re-arrangement (“Verschie- 
bung”) of forces within the state... The aim of our political 
struggle, then remains as before, the conquest of power within 
the State by the gaining ofa majority in Parliament, and the 
conversion of Parliament into the master of the government” 
(pp. 726, 727, 732). 

This is nothing but the most vulgar opportunism : a repudi- 
ation of revolution in deeds, whilst upholding it in words. 
Kautsky’s imagination goes no further than a ‘government 
willing to meet the proletariat half way’—further backwards 
towards philistinism than we were in 1847, when the “Commu- 
nist Manifesto” proclaimed “the organisation of the proletariat 
as the ruling class.” Kautsky will have to realise his beloved 
“anity” with the Scheidemanns, Plekhanoffs and Vanderveldes : 
all the lot will agree to fight for a government “meeting the 
proletariat half way.” 

* But we shall go forward to break with these traitors to 
Socialism. We are working for a complete destruction of the 
old machinery of government, in such a way that the armed 
workers themselves shall be the government, which will be a 
very different thing. Kautsky may enjoy the pleasant company 
of the Legiens, Davids, Plekhanoffs, Potressoffs. Tseretellis 
and Tchernoffs, who are quite willing to work for the “re- 
arrangement of forces within the State... the gaining of a 
majority in-Parliament, and the supremacy of Parliament over 


STATE AND REVOLUTION 133 


the government.” A most worthy object, wholly acceptable to 
opportunists, in which everything remains within the framework 
of 2 middle-class parliamentary republic. 

We. however, shall go forward to a break with the oppor- 
tunists. And the whole of thé class conscious proletariat will 
be with us—not for a “re-arrangement of forces,” but for the 
overthrow of the capitalist class, the destruction of bourgeois 
parliamentarism, the building up of a democratic republic after 
the type of the Commune or a republic of Soviets (Councils) of 
of workers’ and soldiers’ deputies—the revolutionary dictator- 


ship of the proletariat. 
* 


* 


Further to the “right” of Kautsky there are, international 
Socialism, such tendencies as the “Socialist Monthly” (“Sozia- 
listische Monatshefte”) in Germany (Legien, David, Kolb and 
many others, including the Scandinavians, Stauning and 
Branting) ; the followers of Jaures and Vandervelde in France 
and Belgium ; Turati, Treves and other representatives of the 
right-wing of the Italian party ; the Fabians and “independents” 
(the Independent Labour Party, dependert, as a matter of fact, 
always on the Liberals) in England ; and similar sectiéns. All 
these gentry, while playing a great, very often a predominant 
role, in parliamentary work and in the journalism of the party, 
decisively reject the dictatorship of the proletariat and carry 
out a policy of unconcealed opportunism. In the eyes of these 
gentry, the dictatorship of the proletariat “contradicts” demo- 
"eracy ! There is really nothing seriously to distinguish them 

from lower middle class democrats. 
' Taking these circumstances into consideration, we have a 
tight to conclude that the Second International, in the persons 
af the overwhelming majority of its official representatives, has 
completely sunk down into opportunism. The experience of 


134 STATE AND REVOLUTION 


the Commune has been not only forgotten, but distorted. So 
far from making vivid in the workers’ minds the near approach 


of the time when they are to smash the old machinery of the 
State and substitute a new one, thereby making their political 
-domination the foundation for a Socialist reconstruction of 
society, they have actually taught the workers the direct 
opposite of this, and represented the “conquest of power” ina 
way that left thousands of loopholes to opportunism. 

It was a fateful thing to have confused and hushed up the 
question of the relation of a proletarian revolution to the State 
ata time when the States, with their swollen military apparatus 
in a whirlwind .of Imperialist rivalry, had become monstrors 
beasts devouring the lives of millions of peoples, in order ʻo 
‘decide whether England or Germany—ithis or that group ı uf 
financial capitalists—should dominate the world. 


END 